3M1 


ou. 


W. 

Wei 
■ 

B 

29§a 


Hi 


mm 


B 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


\ 


JITYENTUS  MUNDI 


THE  GODS  AND  MEN 

OF  THE  HEROIC  AGE 


* 


BY  THE  RIGHT  HONORABLE 


WILLIAM  EWART  GLADSTONE 

-  \  MP,  R  X^S^faN: 


BOSTON 

LITTLE,  BROWN,  AND  COMPANY 
1869 


Note.  —  In  this  edition,  all  the  references  to  the  poems  of  Homer 
have  been  carefully  verified,  and  nearly  two  hundred  errors  cor- 
rected. No  alteration  has  been  made  in  the  text,  beyond  the  correction 
of  a  few  misprints. 

3y  Transfer 

NOV  20  mi 


CAMBRIDGE : 
PRESS  OF  JOHN  WILSON  AND  SON. 


PREFACE. 


In  this  work,  which  is  mainly  the  produce  of  the 
two  Recesses  of  1867  and  1868, 1  have  endeavored  to 
embody  the  greater  part  of  the  results  at  which  I 
arrived  in  the  6  Studies  on  Homer  and  the  Homeric 
Age,'  185?.  Those  results,  however,  are  considerably 
modified  in  the  Ethnological,  and  in  the  Mythological, 
portions  of  the  inquiry.  The  chief  source  of  modifica- 
tion in  the  former  has  been  that  a  further  prosecution 
of  the  subject  with  respect  to  the  Phoenicians  has 
brought  cut  much  more  clearly  and  fully  what  I  had 
only  ventured  to  suspect  or  hint  at,  and  gives  them, 
if  I  am  right,  a  highly  influential  function  in  forming 
the  Greek  nation.  A  fuller  view  of  this  element  in 
its  composition  naturally  acts  in  an  important  manner 
upon  any  estimate  of  Pelasgians  and  Hellenes  re- 
spectively. 

This  Phoenician  influence  reaches  far  into  the 
sphere  of  the  mythology ;  and  tends,  as  I  think, 
greatly  to  clear  the  views  we  may  reasonably  take  of 
that  curious  and  interesting  subject. 


vi 


PEEFACE. 


I  have  also  greatly  profited  by  the  laborious  and 
original  treatise  of  Dr.  Hahn,  on  Albanian  Archae- 
ology and  Antiquities,  as  well  as  manners ;  which, 
although  published  at  Jena  in  1854,  was  scarcely,  if 
at  all,  known  in  this  country  in  1858. 

But,  further,  I  have  endeavored  to  avoid  a  certain 
crudity  of  expression  in  some  sections  of  the  '  Olym- 
pos,'  which  led  to  misconceptions  of  my  meaning  with 
respect  to  the  action  of  tradition  (especially  of  sacred 
or  Hebrew  tradition)  and  invention  respectively,  in  the 
genesis  of  the  Greek  mythological  system. 

In  dealing  with  the  Third  portion  of  the  '  Studies,' 
called  Aoidos,  I  have  contracted  a  great  deal,  but 
added  and  altered  little. 

The  immediate  purpose  of  the  former  work  was  to 
draw  out  of  the  text  of  Homer,  by  a  minute  investiga- 
tion of  particulars,  the  results  that  it  appeared  to  me 
to  justify.  Many  of  them  were  more  or  less  new,  and 
the  process  of  inquiry  was  therefore  exhibited  in 
great,  perhaps  in  excessive  or  wearisome,  detail.  I 
have  now  felt  warranted  to  give  a  larger  space  to 
deduction,  and  a  smaller  one  to  minute  particulars  of 
inquiry,  in  a  work  which  aims  at  offering  some  prac- 
tical assistance  to  Homeric  study  in  our  Schools  and 
Universities,  and  even  at  conveying  a  partial  knowl- 
edge of  this  subject  to  persons  who  are  not  habitual 
students.  Of  what  appeared  directly  useful  for  this 
end,  I  have  consciously  omitted  nothing. 


PREFACE. 


vii 


I  am  anxious,  then,  to  commend  to  inquirers,  and 
to  readers  generally,  conclusions  from  the  Homeric 
Poems,  which  appear  to  me  to  be  of  great  interest, 
with  reference  to  the  general  history  of  human  culture, 
and,  in  connection  therewith,  of  the  Providential  gov- 
ernment of  the  world.  But  I  am  much  more  anxious 
to  encourage  and  facilitate  the  access  of  educated 
persons  to  the  actual  contents  of  the  text.  The 
amount  and  variety  of  these  contents  have  not  even 
yet  been  fully  appreciated.  The  delight  received  from 
the  Poems  has  possibly  had  some  influence  in  dis- 
posing the  generality  of  readers  to  rest  satisfied  with 
their  enjoyment.  The  doubts  cast  upon  their  origin 
must  have  assisted  in  producing  and  fostering  a  vague 
instinctive  indisposition  to  laborious  examination. 
The  very  splendor  of  the  poetry  dazzles  the  eye  as 
with  whole  sheets  of  light,  and  may  often  seem  almost 
to  give  to  analysis  the  character  of  vulgarity  or  im- 
pertinence. 

My  main  object,  then,  in  this,  and  in  the  former 
work,  has  been  to  encourage,  or,  if  I  may  so  say,  to 
provoke,  the  close  textual  study  of  the  Poet,  as  the 
condition  of  real  progress  in  what  is  called  the  Homeric 
question,  and  as  a  substitute  for  that  loose  and  second- 
hand method,  not  yet  wholly  out  of  vogue  in  this 
country,  which  seeks  for  information  about  Homer 
anywhere  rather  than  in  Homer  himself. 

In  further  prosecution  of  this  purpose,  I  have  begun, 


viii 


PREFACE. 


and  carried  forward  at  such  intervals  as  I  could  make 
my  own,  another  task.  With  patient  toil,  which 
applied  to  most  authors  would  have  been  drudgery,  I 
have  tried  to  draw  out,  and  to  arrange  in  the  most 
accessible  form,  resembling  that  of  a  Dictionary,  what 
may  be  termed  the  body,  or  earthy  and  tangible  part, 
of  the  contents  of  Homer.  To  a  dissection  of  such  a 
kind,  the  ethereal  spirit  cannot  be  submitted.  This 
analysis  will  be  separately  published,  so  soon  as  other 
calls  upon  my  time  may  permit.  It  must  not  be 
supposed  that  so  homely  a  production  aspires  to 
exhibit  Homer  as  a  poet.  Yet  it  exhibits  him  as  a 
chronicler  and  as  an  observer ;  it  helps'  to  give  an 
idea  of  his  power  by  showing  some  part  at  least  of  the 
copious  materials  with  which  he  executed  his  great 
synthesis,  the  first,  and  also  the  best,  composition  of 
an  Age,  the  most  perfect  '  form  and  body  of  a  time,' 
that  ever  has  been  achieved  by  the  hand  of  man. 

Like  Coloner  Mure,  I  am  convinced  that  the  one 
thing  wanted  in  order  to  a  full  solution  of  what  is 
called  the  Homeric  question  is  knowledge  of  the  text. 
In  an  aggregate  of  27,000  lines,  as  full  of  infinitely 
varied  matter  (to  use  a  familiar  phrase)  as  an  egg  is 
full  of  meat,  this  is  not  so  commonplace  an  accom- 
plishment as  might  at  first  sight  be  supposed.  I 
have  striven  to  attain  it ;  yet,  as  I  know,  with  very 
partial  success.  And  I  do  not  hesitate  to  say,  with 
the  productions  of  some  recent  writers  and  critics  on 


PREFACE. 


the  Poet  in  my  mind,  that  the  reading  public  ought  to 
be  very  wary  in  accepting  unverified  statements  of 
what  is  or  is  not  in  Homer.  I  eschew  the  invidious 
task  of  illustrating  this  proposition  from  the  pages  of 
others :  possibly  it  might  receive  some  illustration 
from  my  own. 

I  have  felt  great  embarrassment,  in  common  I 
suppose  with  many  more,  in  consequence  of  the 
unsettled  and  transitionary  state  of  our  rules  and 
practice  with  respect  to  Greek  names,  and  to  the 
Latin  forms  of  them. 

Upon  the  whole,  not  without  misgiving,  but  not 
without  consideration,  I  have  acted  upon  the  belief 
that  we  cannot  permanently  fall  back  into  the  system ' 
which  we  were  content  until  half  a  century  ago  to 
follow,  and  which  Mr.  Mitford  and  Mr.  Grote  assailed 
in  common  ;  that  we  cannot  well  stand  where  we  are  ; 
and  that  we  should,  if  possible,  in  this  as  in  all 
matters,  try  to  make  preparation  for  the  future,  and 
make  approaches  at  least  towards  a  durable  system. 

First,  then,  I  follow  many  high  authorities  in  adopt- 
ing generally  the  names  of  the  Greek  deities  and 
mythological  personages,  instead  of  the  Latin  ones. 

Secondly,  with  respect  to  names  which  have  in  no 
way  become  familiar  to  our  ears  or  been  domesticated 
in  the  English  tongue,  instead  of  the  Latin  forms  and 
terminations,  I  adopt  commonly  the  Greek ;  and  say 
Iasos,  Acrisios,  Eurumachos,  instead  of  Iasus,  Acri- 


X 


PREFACE. 


sius,  Eurymachus  :  as  also  Achaioi,  Hippemolgoi, 
Lotophagoi,  Phaiakes,  instead  of  Achaians,  Hippe- 
molgi,  Lotophagi,  Phasacians. 

But  I  have  usually  followed  the  old  custom  in  cases 
where  Greek  words  have  been,  so  to  speak,  translated, 
so  that  the  English  ear  has  become  thoroughly  accus- 
tomed to  the  rendering,  whether  it  be  effected  by  the 
Latin  form,  as  Cyprus  for  Kvtzqoq,  or  by  an  English 
one,  as  Ehodes  for  Bliodos. 

Yet  a  case  like  the  first  of  these  exhibits  the  prac- 
tical mischief  of  a  somewhat  degenerate  system ;  for 
the  name  Kupros  would,  more  readily  than  Cyprus, 
have  suggested  the  fact,  that  copper  owes  its  name  to 
that  island,  which  first  afforded  to  Europe  and  the 
Mediterranean  a  plentiful  supply  of  so  primitive  and 
important  a  metal.  In  this  matter  of  names  I  am 
less  consistent  than  Mr.  Grote ;  and  less  bold,  for  I 
have  not  the  same  title  to  expect  obedience.  I  can 
only  say  that  my  practice  is  accommodated,  as  far  as 
I  am  able,  to  a  state  of  transition,  and  that  I  have  no 
doubt  it  is  open  to  criticism  in  detail,  even  from  those 
who  may  accept  the  general  rule. 

Lastly,  I  have  in  many  cases  written  a  Greek  word 
in  Eoman  type.  I  know  not  whether  it  will  or  will 
not,  at  some  time,  be  found  practicable  to  serve  the 
purposes  of  all  languages  by  one  and  the  same  char- 
acter. But  the  general  knowledge  of  the  relationship 
of  tongues,  and  of  particular  languages,  is  increasing ; 


PREFACE. 


xi 


and  it  may  be  both  •  of  interest  and  of  use  to  the 
English  reader,  though  unacquainted  with  Greek,  to 
know  the  form  and  body  of  the  words  discussed  in 
the  text,  when  this  advantage  can  be  given  without 
seriously  distorting  the  words  themselves. 

Hawarden,  North  Wales, 
October,  1868. 


» 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  I. 


Introduction. 

PAGE 

Popular  appreciation  of  the  Homeric  works   1 

Viewed  too  much  through  later  traditions   1 

The  Author  unknown  as  a  Person   2 

Date  at  which  he  lived   3 

Place  of  his  birth  and  residence   6 

The  poetry  of  Homer  historic                                               .  7 

Theurgy  of  the  Poems  self-consistent   9 

Important  internal  evidence  as  to  the  historic  character  of  the 

Poems   10 

Uncertainty  respecting  them   11 

The  'Hymns'   12 

Arguments  of  those  who  support  a^dual  authorship  discussed  .    .  14 

Iliad  and  Odyssey  compared   17 

Text  of  the  Poems  discussed  18-26 

Comparative  antiquity  of  Homer  and  Hesiod   26 

Evidence  of  Homer  in  relation  to  his  age   28 

Discrepancy  between  Homeric  and  Post-Homeric  tradition    .    .  29 

Conclusion  concerning  the  Text  of  the  Poet   30 

CHAPTER  II. 

The  Three  Great  Appellatives. 

The  '  Greeks  '  of  the  Troica  were  Achaians                            .  32 

Pre-Hellenic  races  —  Pelasgoi   32 

Designations  of  the  Greeks  of  the  Iliad   33 


Xiv  CONTENTS. 

PAGE 

Instances  of  chronological  succession  of  Homeric  names     ...  34 

'  Argeioi '  used  as  a  national  designation  and  in  a  local  sense  .    .  35 

The  Danaoi  .   36 

Derivation  of  Homeric  national  or  tribal  names   37 

Homer's  unwilling  testimony  to  the  foreign  origin  of  Greek 

Houses   38 

Genealogy  of  the  race  of  Danaos   40 

Post-Homeric  tradition  with  regard  to  Danaos   41 

Conclusions  as  to  the  Danaoi   42 

Argeioi   42 

Local  use  of  the  word   43 

Poetic  and  archaic  uses  of  it   44 

Application  of  the  territorial  name  Argos   45 

Common  term  in  three  distinct  territorial  names   50 

Four  uses  of  in  Homer   52 

Derivation  of  Homeric  names  of  countries  and  places    ....  53 

Uses  of  the  word  '  argos '   54 

The  derivative  Argeioi   55 

This  name  belongs  properly  to  the  commonality   59 

The  third  Appellative  :  Achaioi   60 

Epithets  applied  to  the  name  Achaioi   62 

Force  of  the  word  '  dios '   63 

Instances  of  the  use  of  the  appellative  Achaioi   64 

The  Myrmidons   66 

Epithet  '  Panachaioi '   70 

Conclusion  respecting  the  use  of  the  Three  Appellatives    ...  71 

CHAPTER  III. 
The  Pelasgoi. 

Classification  of  the  Homeric  testimony  concerning  the  Pelasgoi  73 

Wide  extension  of  the  Pelasgoi   73 

'  Pelasgic  Zeus '   74 

Thessaly  a  Palasgic  country   74 

Thracians   76 

Kaukones   76 

Epithets  given  to  the  Pelasgians  .    .    .   76 

The  Larisse  of  Homer   77 

Other  heads  of  Homeric  evidence  concerning  the  Pelasgoi ...  78 

Connection  between  Arcadians  and  Pelasgoi   79 


CONTENTS.  XV 

PAGE 

The  Ionians   81 

Local,  not  personal,  relation  between  Athene  and  Athens  ...  83 

Erectheus  probably  a  Pelasgian   84 

Evidence  as  to  the  Pelasgian  character  of  Attica  in  early  times 

(Ionians)   85 

Pelasgian  element  in  Thessaly   87 

'  Iason  Argos '   88 

Marks  of  a  Pelasgian  character  in  the  population  of  Crete  ...  89 

The  Five  Races  domesticated  in  Greece  .    .    .    .   90 

Eteocretes  and  Kudones   90 

TheLeleges.   91 

Pelasgian  occupation  of  Epiros   92 

Etymology  of  the  Pelasgian  name   94 

Difference  of  race  and  rank  among  the  Greek  population    ...  95 

The  Pelasgian  element  in  the  Greek  language   96 

List  of  words  (supposed  to  be  of  Pelasgian  origin)  common  to 

the  Greek  and  Latin  languages   97 

I.  Objects  of  Inanimate  Nature   97 

II.  Trees,  Plants   98 

III.  Animated  Nature   98 

IV.  Objects  connected  with  Food   98 

V.  Related  to  Out-door  Labor   98 

VI.  Navigation   98 

VII.  Dwellings   99 

VIII.  Clothing   99 

IX.  The  Human  Body   99 

X.  The  Family   99 

IX.  Society.    .    .   <   99 

XII.  General  Ideas   99 

XIII.  Adjectives  of  Common  Use   100 

Scant  stock  of  words  relating  to  religion   100 

Words  relating  (1)  to  war,  (2)  to  navigation,  (8)  to  metals  .    .    .  101 

Distinction  with  regard  to  names  of  persons,  &c   103 

Extra-Homeric  evidence  of  the  wide  extension  of  the  Pelasgoi   .  107 

CHAPTER  IV. 
Hellas. 

The  word  '  Hellas  '  and  its  derivatives  :    .  110 

Phthie ;  the  phrase  '  Pelasgic  Argos  '   112 

The  designation  '  Panhellenes  '   114 


xvi 


CONTENTS. 


PAGE 


Kephallenes   115 

Helloi  or  Selloi :  the  Aspirate  and  Sigma  interchangeable  .    .    .  116 

Route  of  the  Hellic  tribes  into  Greece  .   118 

CHAPTER  V. 

The  Phosnicians  and  the  Egyptians. 

Minos   119 

His  Phoenician  character    .    .    .    .    .    .   120 

Phoenician  tongue  probably  spoken  in  Crete   121 

Daidalos  —  Kadmos   123 

Important  works  of  art  obtained  from  the  Phoenicians    ....  124 

Dependence  of  the  Greeks  on  the  Phoenicians  (ship  Argo)     .    .  125 

The  Egyptian  Thebes   126 

Conclusion  respecting  the  significance  of  the  word  '  Phoenicia ' 

in  Homer   130 

Art  of  writing  introduced  by  Phoenicians   131 

Art  of  building  with  hewn  stone  probably  introduced  by  them    .  132 

The  people  of  Scherie  (Corf u)  of  Phoenician  stock     ......  133 

Their  games  '.   133 

Fine  Art,  in  Homer,  proceeded  from  a  Phoenician  source  .  .  .  134 
Respective  contributions  of  Pelasgians  and  Hellenes  to  the 

aggregate  Greek  nation   135 

Possible  personal  medium  between  Greece  and  Phoenicia  .    .    .  136 

Were  the  Aiolids  Phoenician  ?   138 

Achaian  invasion  of  Egypt   146 

CHAPTER  VI. 

On  the  Title  'Anax  Andr5n/ 

Substantial  distinction  between  titles  and  epithets  descriptive  of 

•  station  or  office  .     151 

Title  •  Anax  Andron/  to  whom  applied   153 

I.  Agamemnon   155 

His  extraction  :  passage  concerning  the  Sceptre  ....  155 
Simultaneous  rise  of  the  Achaian  race  and  of  the  House 

of  Pelops   .•   158 

Tantalos   158 

Niobe:  Pelops  ■  159 


CONTENTS.  XVii 

PAGE 

Achaians  a  Thessalian  race   161 

Title  ('Anax  Andron')  anterior  to  the  constitution  of 

Achaian  society   162 

II.  Anchises,  and  III.  JEneas   163 

Position  of  the  Helloi  and  Dardanians  severally  ....  163 
Why  the  title  is  applied  to  Anchises  and  iEneas,  but  not 

given  to  Priam  or  any  of  his  family   163 

Absence  of  Anchises  from  the  Trojan  Council ;  his  sover- 
eignty  164 

-ZEneas  :  jealousy  between  him  and  the  house  of  Priam    .  165 

Pointed  use  of  the  phrase  'Anax  Andrdn,  .    .    .    .    .    .  166 

IV.  Augeias   167 

Ruled  over  Elis  .167 

His  extraction  and  descent   168 

Ephure,  a  town  of  Elis   169 

V.  Euphetes   170 

King  of  Ephure  :  distinction  between  the  towns  so  named  170 

VI.  Eumelos  .    .    .    .•   171 

Rules  at  Pherai ;  an  Aiolid   171 

Summing  up  of  the  Homeric  evidence  concerning  the 

phrase  '  Anax  Andron '   172 

CHAPTER  VII. 

THE  OLYMPIAN  SYSTEM. 

Homer  the  maker,  not  of  poems  alone,  but  of  a  language,  a  na- 
tion, and  a  religion   176 

Contrast  between  Homer  and  the  Hesiodic  Theogony  ....  177 

Variegated  aspect  of  Hellenic  religion  ;  reasons  for  this    .    .    .  178 

Instances   179 

Modes  of  reconciliation  or  adjustment   180 

Debasement  of  the  Olympian  system   182 

Its  specific  principle  humanitarian   183 

It  wanted  the  supports  of  a  hierarchy  and  of  sacred  books     .    .  183 

Actual  operation  of  the  Hellenic  Theo-Mythology   184 

The  later  religion  in  relation  to  philosophers  and  legislators    .    .  184 
Plato's  reproaches  against  Homer's  treatment  of  the  gods  un- 
founded ;  cases  in  point   187 

Materials  supplied  as  the  base  of  Homeric  religion    .    .    .  ' .    .  188 

The  five  great  deities   189 

b 


xviii 


CONTENTS. 


PAGE 


Homer's  mode  of  dealing  with  the  elder  gods   189 

Vestiges  in  the  Olympian  system  of  Elemental  worship    .    .    .  190 

Nature-gods  generally  treated  as  subterranean   192 

Eiver-worship  local   192 

Olympian  system  appropriates  the  materials  of  the  older  ele- 
mental one   194 

Homeric  mythology  ought  to  be  severed  from  the  schemes  of 
(1)  Nature-worship;  (2)  Eoman  mythology;  (3)  scheme  of 

classical  Greece   195 

Homeric  polity  framed  on  the  human  model   195 

Instances  of   196 

Functions  of  the  deities   197 

Classification  of  the  Olympian  personages  in  Homer     ....  200 

Limitations  and  liabilities  of  the  subordinate  gods   201 

Correspondence  between  certain  features  of  the  Olympian  system 

and  the  Hebraic  traditions   202 

The  Messiah   205 

Theories  as  to  the  origin  of  heathen  religions   206 

_y/  Other  Homeric  correspondences  with  Hebrew  tradition     .    .    .  209 
The  highest  conception  of  deity  does  not  exclude  the  element  of 

fraud   211 

Grand  distinction  between  the  Homeric  and  the  later  systems    .  214 

Homer's  wide  notion  of  the  gods  as  governing  all  mankind   .    .  ^4 

Collective  action  of  the  Olympian  deities   O^iL 

No  instance  of  a  married  deity,  save  Zeus   216 

Element  of  deontology  ;  will  and  ought  

Classification  of  the  Di  majores   218 

CHAPTER  VIII. 

THE  DIVINITIES   OF  OLYMPOS. 

Section  I.  Zeus   221 

Five  different  capacities  ascribed  to  Zeus  .......  222 

1.  The  Pelasgian  Zeus   223 

2.  The  Divine  Zeus   225 

His  universal  supremacy   226 

His  limitations  and  liabilities   227 

3.  4.  The  Olympian  Zeus,  and  the  Lord  of  the  Air    ....  228 

Omnipotence  not  conceived  of  by  Homer     ....  230 

Headship  of  Zeus  ;  the  arbiter  among  the  gods     .    .  230 


CONTENTS.  Xix 

PAGE 

His  sole  and  supreme  responsibility   232 

Aristocratic  character  of  the  Olympian  polity  .    .    .  233 

5.  Zeus  the  type  of  Anthropomorphism   234 

Individual  character  of  Zeus  of  a  low  order  ....  235 

Not,  however,  devoid  of  affections   236 

The  masterpiece  of  Homeric  mythology  with  regard 

to  the  humanizing  element   236 

Section  II.  Here   236 

Of  all  deities  the  most  national   236 

Special  characteristics  of ;  she  disappears  from  the  Odyssey  237 

Called  1  Argeian  Here '   238 

Her  rank  in  Olympos   239 

Interpretation  of  the  myth  of  the  deposition  of  Kronos  .    .  240 

The  function  of  Here  as  regulator  of  birth   241 

Vestige  of  the  prerogative  of  Here  as  a  Nature-Power    .    .  243 

Section  III.  Poseidon   243 

His  position  and  rank  .    .    .   244 

Not  an  elemental  deity ;  Nereus  the  true  sea-god    ....  245 

Special  functions  of  Poseidon   247 

Legends  relating  to  him  ;  their  character   248 

His  province  in  the  Outer- World   248 

His  supremacy  in  the  Odyssey  working,  rather  than  abstract  250 

Prevalence  of  Poseidonian  worship  among  the  Phoenicians  .  251 

The  Trident ;  relation  to  some  tradition  of  a  Trinity     .    .  252 

Cyclops,  children  of  Poseidon   252 

The  Phoenician  origin  of  Poseidon  supplies  a  key  to  his  posi- 
tion and  attributes   253 

Section  IV.  Aidoneus   253 

Probably  a  Nature-Power  of  an  older  Theogony     ....  254 

His  character  and  functions   255 

The  '  Zeus  of  the  Underworld '   256 

Section  V.  Leto   259 

Epithets  given  to  her   259 

Her  circumscribed  action   259 

High  ascriptions  of  her  dignity   260 

Etymology  of  the  name   261 

Probable  record  of  the  Hebrew  tradition  respecting  the 

Mother  of  the  Deliverer   262 

Section  VI.  Demeter   262 

Homeric  evidence  respecting  her   263 

Her  share  in  the  old  tradition  of  Nature-worship    ....  265 


XX 


CONTENTS. 


PAGE 


Section  VII.    Dime   266 

i  A  wife  of  Zeus  ;  mentioned  in  one  passage  only     ....  266 

Testimony  of  Hesiod   266 

A  Nature-Power  ,  .    .  267 

Section  VIII.   Athene  and  Apollo   268 

Their  position  in  Olympos  a  hopeless  solecism,  if  viewed 

apart  from  Hebrew  traditions   269 

Relation  of  rank  between  Here  and  Athene   270 

Dignity  of  Apollo   271 

Correspondence  of  Homer  with  the  Messianic  tradition  of 

the  Logos  and  the  Son  of  the  Woman   272 

Superior  sanctitas  of  Athene  and  Apollo   272 

They  are  the  two  great  Agents   273 

Uniform  identity  of  will  between  Zeus  and  Apollo  .    .    .    .  275 
Apollo  the  defender  of  heaven  and  deliverer  of  the  im- 
mortals  '   276 

Functions  of  these  two  deities  encroach  upon  the  provinces 

of  other  divinities   277 

Jointly  invoked   279 

No  local  limit  to  their  worship                                          .  279 

They  are  independent  of  limitations  of  place  ......  280 

Omnipresent;  prayer  addressed  to  them  from  all  places  .    .  280 

Exempt  from  physical  infirmity  or  need  in  general ....  281 

Attributes  of  bulk ;  locomotion   282 

Apollo  and  Athene  administer  powers  otherwise  referred  to 

Zeus                                                                      .  283 

Both  exercise  vast  power  over  external  nature   284 

Both  possess  lofty  moral  excellence  and  purity   286 

Distinctive  functions  of  Apollo,  severing  him  from  Athene  287 

The  ministry  of  death  .287 

Hellenic  preservation  of  the  element  of  Hebrew  tradition  290 

Section  IX.    Hephaistos   291 

One  of  the  seven  astral  deities  of  the  East     .    .    .    .    .    .  291 

Dual  course  of  tradition  relating  to  Hephaistos   291 

The  Charites   294 

Matchless  deity  of  Hephaistos   295 

The  architect  of  the  palaces  of  the  gods  •.    .  295 

Section  X.    Ares   296 

'In  point  of  strength  divine,  in  point  of  mind  and  heart 

simply  animal '   296 


CONTENTS.  Xxi 

PAGE 

Represents  the  idea  of  raw  courage   297 

Instances  of  his  action  .  .    .  298 

Section  XI.    Hermes   301 

His  part  in  the  Iliad  secondary   801 

Instances  of  his  agency    .    .    .  •   301 

Idea  of  concealment  inheres  in  his  character   302 

His  probable  connection  with  the  Phoenicians  ......  303 

An  agent  rather  than  a  mere  messenger   304 

His  name  Argeiphontes   305 

Section  XII.   Artemis   305 

In  the  main  a  reflection  of  Apollo   306 

Relation  of,  to  the  Moon-goddess   307 

Shares  with  Apollo  the  ministry  of  death   308 

Her  agency  ubiquitous  in  character   309 

'  Confers  beauty  (of  figure)    .   310 

Epithet  ayv7]  and  its  significancy   311 

Section  XIII.    Persephone   311 

Epithets  applied  to  her   311 

Represents  a  mixture  of  Pelasgic  and  of  Eastern  traditions  .  311 

Co-ruler  with  Aidoneus   311 

Etymology  of  the  name   312 

The  Persian  race    .313 

Section  XIV.  Aphrodite   313 

Her  position  and  several  functions  in  the  Homeric  mythology  313 

Local  indications  of  her  worship   317 

Etymology  of  the  name   318 

Section  XV.    Dionusos   319 

Obscurity  of  traditions  concerning  him  .   319 

No  clearly  divine  act  assigned  to  him  :    .  319 

Recital  concerning  Lucourgos   320 

Probable  sign  of  his  worship  in  the  Odyssey  ......  320 

Worship  of  Dionusos  recent ;  and  opposed  on  introduction  321 

He  is  placed  within  the  Phoenician  circle   322 

To  be  regarded  probably  as  a  deified  mortal   322 

Section  XVI.    Helios,  or  the  Sun   323 

His  personality   323 

His  appearance  in  (a)  the  Iliad,  (6)  the  Odyssey    ....  323 


xxii 


CONTENTS. 


PAGE 

Theft  of  the  Oxen  of  the  Sun  .   324 

>  This  legend  of  Phoenician  origin   324 

The  Sun  an  Eastern  deity   326 

Incorporation  of  the  traditions  of  Apollo  with  those  of  the 

Sun    .    .....  "..                                          .  PfJ 

Section  XVII.    Hebe   327 

Character  of  her  offices   327 

Expresses  the  idea  of  youth   328 

Section  XVIII.    Themis  .    .   329 

A  member  of  the  Olympian  court   329 

Signification  of  the  name   330 

Section  XIX.    Paieon   330 

His  function  as  healer   331 

Eelation  between  Paieon  and  Apollo   331 

The  paian  or  hymn  to  Apollo   332 

Section  XX.    Iris   332 

Instances  of  her  office  as  Messenger                                .  333 

The  name  of  the  rainbow ;  and  the  Hebrew  tradition  .    .    .  333 

Her  agency   334 

Section  XXI.    Thetis   336 

Her  origin  elemental   336 

Her  vast  influence  .    .   336 

Her  prayer  to  Zeus   337 

Etymology  of  the  name   337 

Character  of  her  marriage  to  Peleus   338 

Pelasgian  worship  of  Zeus ;  double  relation  of  Thetis     .    .  339 

Instances  of  her  agency   340 

The  reconciler  between  the  conflicting  creeds   340 

Her  influence  with  the  gods  grounded  on  obligation    .    .    .  341 

Principal  particulars  respecting  her  .    ...    ...    •    •    •  342 

Epithets  applied  to  her   344 

Later  traditions  appear  but  arbitrary  comment   344 


CHAPTER  IX. 

Further  Sketch  and  Moral  Aspects  of  the 
Olympian  System. 

I.  Various  Orders  of  Preternatural  Beings 
1.  The  Nature-Powers  


contents.  xxiii 

PAGE 

2.  The  Minor  Nature-Powers   347 

3.  Mythological  Personages  of  the  Outer  or  Phoenician 

Sphere   348 

4.  The  Kebellious  Powers   349 

5.  Ministers  of  Doom   349 

6.  Poetical  Impersonations   350 

II.  TheErinues   350 

The  three  chief  recognized  descriptions  of  preternatural 

force.  ..........    .  350 

Action  of  the  Erinues   352 

Their  functions   352 

Etymology  of  the  name   356 

III.  Ate  the  Temptress   356 

Her  place  in  Homer   357 

Character  of  her  temptations   357 

IV.  Fate  or  Doom   358 

Distinction  between  the  words  conveying  the  idea  —  Ker, 

Moira,  Aisa,  &c   359 

V.  Animal  Worship   366 

Sanctity  attaching  to  the  Oxen  of  the  Sun   366 

Other  traces  of  animal  worship   362 

Animal  Sacrifice   363 

VI.    On  the  Modes  of  Approximation  between  the  Divine  and  the  Hu- 
man Nature  .'   ^563^/j 

Elements  of  the  system  of  deification  of  mortals  discernible  *.y 

in  Homer   364 

Divine  filiation   367 

'  Zeus-born '  princes   370 

Explanation  of  this  title  .   371 

.  Four  channels  of  approach  between  the  human  and  divine 

natures   373 

VII.  The  Homeric  View  of  the  Future  State   373 

Three-fold  division  of  the  Future  World   374 

VIII.  The  Olympian  System  in  its  Results   377 

History  of  the  human  race  before  Christ  is  the  history  of  a 

preparation  for  His  Advent   377 

Character  and  vitality  of  the  Olympian  system   378 

A  precursor  of  Christianity   380 


xxiv 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  X. 
Ethics  of  the  Heroic  Age. 

page 

Section  I.     General  outline  of  the  moral  character  of  the 

Homeric  Greeks   381 

Heracles   383 

Moral  force  of  Religion    .    .  •   384 

Voice  of  Conscience   386 

Homicide   387 

The  weak  point  of  tenderness  for  fraud   388 

Idea  of  sin  implied  in  Homer   390 

The  Homeric  view  of  patience   392 

Virtue  of  justice   393 

Virtue  of  self-restraint   394 

The  model  spirit  of  moderation,  the  to  fiiaov   396 

Implacability  regarded  as  unequivocally  vicious   397 

Extremest  forms  of  depravity  unknown    .......  398 

Domestic  relations   400 

The  Poet's  admiration  for  Beauty   402 

The  delicacy  of  Homer   403 

Sketch  of  Greek  life  in  the  heroic  age   405 

Section  II.    Position  held  by  women   408 

No  trace  of  polygamy   410 

Concubinage   411 

Relations  of  youth  and  maiden   411 

Picture  of  Greek  marriage   414 

Employments  of  women   415 

CHAPTER  XL 

Polity  of  the  Heroic  Age. 

Similitude  between  Homeric  and  British  ideas   417 

Reverence  for  kings  .   418 

No  '  balance  of  forces '   419 

The  kings   420 

Personal  attributes  of  the  king   422 

His  fourfold  character   428 


CONTENTS.  XXV 

PAGE 

Agamemnon  a  '  King  of  kings '   431 

Transactions  of  the  Army  decided  in  the  Assemblies    ....  432 

Ranks  traceable  in  the  army  ,   433 

Composition  of  the  Council   434 

Importance  of  Power  of  Speech   435 

Majority  and  minority   439 

The  TV,  or  Public  Opinion   441 

Chief  component  parts  of  Greek  society   442 

Representation  of  the  state  of  society  in  Ithaca   445 

Absence  of  written  '  law '  —  The  Oath                                  .  447 

The  Xeinos  or  Xenos   447 

Sources  for  supplying  slaves   448 

The  medium  of  exchange   450 

Leading  political  ideas  of  the  Poems   451 

Bonds  cementing  Greek  society   453 


CHAPTER  XII. 

Resemblances  and  Differences  between  the  Greeks 
and  the  Trojans. 


Double  ethnical  relation   455 

Religion  .   456 

Prevalence  of  Nature-worship  in  Troy   457 

Sacerdotal  institutions  and  ritual  forms   459 

Superior  morality  of  the  Greeks   462 

Trojan  tendency  to  sensual  excess   464 

Polygamy  of  Priam   465 

Relation  of  Priam  to  subordinate  countries   '468 

Trojan  Assembly   468 

CHAPTER  XIII. 

Geography  of  Homer. 

Section  I.    The  Catalogue   471 

Genealogies  of  the  Greek  Catalogue   471 

The  Greek  territory  divided  into  three  circles  and  a  fourth 

irregular  figure   472 

Greek  and  Trojan  Catalogues   473 

c 


xxvi 


CONTENTS. 


PAGE 

Section  II.    The  Plain  of  Troy  .    .   474 

Leading  topical  points^   474 

Discussion  of  Homer's  description   475 

Section  III.    The  Outer  Geography   479 

Data  for  an  Homeric  map  of  the  Outer  Geography  .  .  .  482 
Indications  of  Homer's  belief  in  a  great  sea  occupying  the 

heart  of  the  European  continent   484 

Stages  of  the  Voyages  of  Odysseus   488 

CHAPTER  XIV. 
Plots,  Characters,  and  Similes. 

Section  I.    The  Plot  of  the  Poems  ;  especially  of  the  Iliad    .  495 

Section  II.    Some  Characters  of  the  Poems   500 

1.  Achilles  .500 

2.  Odysseus   502 

3.  Agamemnon   506 

4.  Diomed  and  Ajax   508 

5.  Helen   509 

6.  Hector   513 

7.  Paris   516 

Section  III.    The  Similes  of  the  Poems  [£.    .    .,  518 

CHAPTER  XV. 
Miscellaneous. 

Section  I.    The  Idea  of  Beauty  in  Homer    .   521 

Personal  Beauty,  and  Beauty  of  Landscape   523 

Section  II.    The  Idea  of  Art  in  Homer   525 

Works  of  Art                                                          .  525 

Material  of  Art   526 

Homer's  delineation  of  Art   528 

Egyptian  and  Assyrian  schools  of  Art   529 


CONTENTS. 


xxvii 


PAGE 


Section  III.    Physics  of  Homer   530 

Section  IV.   Metals  in  Homer   533 

Section  V.    Measure  of  Value   538 

Section  VI.    Use  of  Number  in  Homer   540 

Section  VII.    The  Sense  of  Color  in  Homer   544 


Index 


547 


CHAPTER  I. 


Introduction. 

If,  as  the  general  opinion  holds,  the  Iliad  and  the 
Odyssey  are  the  works  of  an  individual  poet  (whom 
we  term  Homer),  they  are  probably,  as  a  connected 
whole,  the  oldest  in  the  world ;  though  a  few  of  the 
Books  of  Scripture,  and,  in  the  opinion  of  some,  a  por- 
tion of  the  Yedas,  may  perhaps  lay  claim  to  a  higher 
antiquity.  They  unquestionably  contain  a  mass  of 
information  respecting  man  in  a  primitive  or  very  early 
stage  of  society,  which  has  not  even  yet  been  thor- 
oughly digested,  and  such  as  is  nowhere  else  to  be 
found.  They  have  also,  through  the  intervention  of 
the  Greek  and  then  of  the  Roman  civilization,  for  both 
of  which  they  form  the  original  literary  base,  entered 
far  more  largely  than  any  other  book,  except  the  Holy 
Scriptures,  into  the* formation  of  modern  thought  and 
life. 

A  main  reason,  which  has  prevented  mankind  from 
profiting  to  the  full  by  these  invaluable  works,  appears 
to  have  been  this;  that,  except  for  the  purposes  of 
purely  poetical  appreciation,  they  have  been  viewed  far 
too  much  through  the  medium  of  later  traditions,  of 

l 


2 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


the  productions  of  the  classic  ages  of  Greece  and  Rome, 
and  especially  of  the  great  epic  of  Yirgil ;  and  the 
multiform  features  of  the  picture  which  he  draws  have 
thus  been  confounded  with  the  representations  of  much 
later,  and  in  many  respects  very  different  ages. 

While  the  works  of  Homer  have  exercised  an  influ- 
ence which  has  been  greater  than  those  of  any  other 
poet,  and  which  is  rising  apparently  at  the  present 
time,  nothing  is  known  of  his  person.    His  blindness, 
but  only  in  mature  and  late  life,  is  allowably  conjec- 
tured from  the  fact  that  he  has  drawn  a  careful  and 
sympathizing  picture  of  the  blind  minstrel  Demodocos 
in  Scherie1  (now  Corfu),  and  has  made  him  more 
conspicuous  than  any  other  Bard  mentioned  in  the 
Poems.    Absorbed  in  his  subject,  the  Poet  never 
refers  to  himself:  in  half-a-dozen  passages  the  perso- 
nal pronoun  is  used — 'Tell  me,  0  Muses,' 2  and  the 
like;  but  it  is  a  mere  grammatical  form,  never  spe- 
cially pointed  to  his  own  individuality.    Of  his  charac- 
ter we  can  only  judge  as  far  as  different  passages  of 
the  Poems  may  enable  us  to  trace  his  personal  sympa- 
thies in  their  tone  and  color.    The  conjecture  as  to 
his  blindness  is  indeed  in  accordance  with  a  passage 
which  Thucydides 3  quotes  as  his  from  the  Hymn  to 
Apollo,  and  which  mentions  it :  but  the  weight  of  this 
evidence  depends  much  more  on  the  beauty  and  pathos 
of  the  verses,  than  on  the  fact  that  the  great  historian 
treats  it  as  by  Homer ;  since  he  does  not  speak  in  the 
character  of  a  witness,  and  the  reference  to  Chios  as 
the  place  of  his  residence  is  a  circumstance  calculated 
to  excite  strong  suspicion. 


i  Od.  viii.  64. 


2  Od.  i.  1. 


3  iiL  104. 


INTRODUCTION. 


3 


With  respect  to  the  date  at  which  Homer  lived, 
nothing  is  known,  except  it  be  by  recent  and  as  yet 
scarcely  recognized  discovery,1  from  sources  extrinsic 
to  the  Poems.  Herodotus  places  him  at  four  hundred 
years  before  himself,  in  the  ninth  century  before  Christ. 
This  would  bring  him  nearly  to  the  epoch  of  Lycurgus. 
But  the  state  of  society  and  manners  in  Greece  de- 
picted by  him  is  far  anterior  to  all  that  is  connected 
with  the  name  of  that  legislator ;  and  betokens  not 
only  priority,  but  long  priority,  to  the  historic  period, 
which  is  commonly  said  to  begin  with  the  Olympiad 
of  Coroebus,  b.  c.  776.  The  date  of  1183  b.  c.  is  fixed 
by  Eratosthenes  for  the  fall  of  Troy :  but  it  has  long 
been  known  to  be  no  more  than  conjectural.2  In  my 
opinion,  that  event  is  quite  as  likely  to  have  been 
older,  as  to  have  been  more  recent.  But  there  are  in 
reality  no  fully  acknowledged  measures  of  time  appli- 
cable to  the  decision  of  the  question.  Homer  alone 
seems  to  afford  us,  for  his  own  age,  any  means  of  esti- 
mating, however  rudely,  the  lapse  of  years.  His  only 
chronology  is  found  in  genealogies,  given  by  him  in 
considerable  numbers,  and  in  singular  correspondence 
with  one  another.  But  this  knowledge,  if  authentic, 
stands  as  an  island  separated  from  us  by  a  sea  of  un- 
known breadth.  We  have  as  yet  no  mode  of  establish- 
ing a  clear  relation  of  time  between  it  and  the  historic 
era. 

The  Poems  afford,  however,  partial  means  of  esti- 
mating the  date  of  Homer,  relatively  to  the  War  of 
Troy.    He  virtually  states,  that  he  was  not  an  eye- 

1  See  Chap.  V.  on  Phoenicia  and  Egypt. 

2  Clinton,  Fasti  Hellenici,  i.  123. 


4 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


witness  of  the  War.1  Poseidon2  prophesies  that  the 
grand-children  of  iEneas  shall  reign  in  Troas ;  and  it 
is  fairly  argued  that  the  Poet  would  not  have  ventured 
on  the  prediction,  if  he  had  not  lived  to  see  its  entire 
or  partial  accomplishment.  A  grandson  of  iEneas 
may  well  have  reigned  in  Troas  within  fifty  or  even 
forty  years  of  the  fall  of  the  city ;  and  a  son  within  a 
much  shorter  period.  Arguments  for  a  greater  inter- 
val have  indeed  been  founded  on  the  passages,  in 
which  the  Poet  contrasts  the  might  of  the  Troic  heroes 
with  the  lower  standard  of  his  own  time.  But  a  ready 
answer  is  surely  found  in  the  fact  that  Nestor,  in  the 
First  Iliad,3  draws  a  somewhat  similar  contrast  be- 
tween the  heroes  of  his  youth,  and  those  of  the  Greek 
army  before  Troy.  Figure  is,  in  truth,  the  main 
element  in  all  such  comparisons.  A  third  argument 
has  been  founded  on  the  passage,  in  which  Here 
observes  to  Zeus  that  he  is  free  to  destroy  the  cities 
she  loves  the  best  —  Argos,  Sparta,  and  Mycenae.4 
Hence,  it  is  thought,  Homer  must  have  lived  after  the 
Dorian  conquest.  But  (1)  we  do  not  find  that  any  of 
these  cities  were  destroyed  at  that  epoch ;  and  (2)  had 
Homer  lived  in  an  age  posterior  to  that  great  revolu- 
tion, he  must  have  betrayed  his  knowledge  of  it  not  in 
one  equivocal  passage,  but  in  many,  and  by  a  multi- 
tude of  signs  of  later  manners.  (3)  The  Dorian  con- 
quest had  the  immediate  effect  of  reducing  Mycenae  to 
obscurity,  while  it  left  Argos  and  Sparta  at  the  head  of 
Greece;  and  it  would  be  strange  indeed  that  Homer, 
if  he  had  witnessed  it,  should  join  the  three  in  a  single 


i  II.  ii.  486. 
a  II.  i.  260-272. 


2  II  xx.  307. 
4  II.  iv.  51. 


INTRODUCTION. 


5 


category,  and  take  no  notice  of  the  distinction.  From 
the  manner  in  which  the  cities  are  mentioned,  we  may 
indeed  rather  say,  that  the  passage  affords  an  argu- 
ment to  show  that  the  Poet  lived  before  that  epoch, 
and  not  after  it.  (4)  It  is  urged  also  that  Homer 
mentions  riding  on  horseback,  and  the  trumpet,  as  in 
use,  but  not  as  in  use  during  the  War.  But  in  the 
Tenth  Iliad,  Odysseus  and  Diomed  ride  the  horses  of 
Rhesos ;  .  and  the  trumpet  appears  to  be  mentioned 
only  as  used  to  summon  a  beleaguered  place  on  the 
arrival  of  the  enemy.1  On  the  other  hand,  Homer 
.seems  again  to  glance  at  his  own  case  in  the  words 
addressed  by  Odysseus  to  Demodocos,  respecting  his 
Trojan  lay :  4  You  have  sung  the  Achaian  woe  right 
well,  as  if  you  had  yourself  been  a  witness,  or  else  had 
heard  it  from  one.'  2  The  idea  seems  here  to  be  con- 
veyed with  distinctness,  that  either  actual  experience 
or,  at  the  least,  the  evidence  of  those  who  had  pos- 
sessed it,  was  a  condition  of  true  excellence  in  historic 
song.  Again,  the  elaborate  plan  by  which,  in  the 
Twelfth  Iliad,  Homer  accounts  for  the  disappearance 
of  the  defensive  work  of  the  Greeks,  seems  to  show 
that  the  interval  since  the  War  must  have  been  short, 
for  if  it  had  been  long,  natural  causes  would  have  done 
more  to  account  for  it. 

A  cardinal  argument  for  placing  the  date  of  the  Poet 
near  that  of  his  subject  is,  that  he  describes  manners 
from  first  to  last  with  the  easy,  natural,  and  intimate 
knowledge  of  a  contemporary  observer.  He  is  in  truth 
in  visible  identity  with  the  age,  the  altering  but  not  yet 
vanished  age,  of  which  he  sings,  while  there  is  a  very 


i  II.  xviii.  219,  220. 


2  Od.  viii.  489-491. 


6 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


broad  interval  of  tone  and  feeling  between  him  and  the 
very  nearest  of  all  that  follow  him.  And  even  the 
difference  to  be  observed  in  the  shade  of  style  and  of 
manner  between  the  Iliad  and  the  Odyssey,  is  just 
such  as  would  be  fairly  due,  in  part  to  the  difference 
of  the  subjects,  and  in  part  to  the  shock  of  those  alter- 
ations, which  were  evidently  caused  in  Greece  by  the 
absence  of  its  kings  and  leaders,  during  a  prolonged 
period,  at  the  War.  I  conjecture,  without  pretending 
to  do  more,  that  Homer  may  well  have  been  born 
before,  or  during,  the  War ;  and  that  he  probably  was 
familiar,  during  the  years  of  his  maturity,  with  those 
who  had  fought  in  it.  For  treating  Homer  as  an 
Asiatic  Greek,  who  lived  after  the  migrations  east- 
ward, there  is  really  neither  reason,  nor  trustworthy 
authority. 

As  to  the  place  of  Homer's  birth  and  residence,  we 
are  yet  more  in  the  dark  than  about  his  date.  The 
testimony  of  the  Poems  is  both  slight  and  equivocal ; 
and  no  other  testimony  is  authentic.  In  one  passage 
he  says  the  Locrians  dwell  beyond,  or  it  may  mean 
over  against,  Euboea,1  on  the  East  of  Greece  ;  in 
another,  the  Echinades  and  Doulichion 2  are  beyond, 
or  over  against,  Elis,  on  the  West  of  Greece.  The 
second  passage  seems  to  destroy  any  such  inference  as 
Wood,  in  his  ingenious  Essay,3  drew  from  the  first. 
On  the  other  hand,  morning  comes  to  Homer  over  the 
sea;4  an  expression  which  seems  to  contemplate  a 
£  whereabout '  on  the  West  of  the  iEgean.  The  char- 
acter given  to  Zephuros,  the  North- West  wind,  varies 


l  II.  ii.  535. 

3  Page  8.  (First  Ed.  in  1775.) 


2  II.  ii.  626. 
4  II.  xxiii.  227. 


INTRODUCTION. 


1 


according  as  it  is  a  sea-wind,  which  it  is  in  the  descrip- 
tion of  the  Elysian  Fields  ;  or  a  mountain-wind,  when 
it  is  described  as  charged  with  snow : 1  and  no  infer- 
ence can  be  drawn  from  it  to  show  that  Homer  lived 
on  any  particular  coast.  Every  line  of  the  Poems 
bears  testimony  to  the  fact  that  Homer  was  not  deriv- 
atively, but  immediately  and  intensely,  Greek.  Con- 
tented with  accumulated  evidence  of  nationality  in  the 
highest  sense,  we  must  leave  the  question  of  the  pre- 
cise birthplace  and  dwelling  of  the  Poet  in  the  dark- 
ness in  which  we  find  it. 

It  cannot  be  too  strongly  affirmed,  that  the  song  of 
Homer  is  historic  song.  Indeed  he  has  probably  told 
us  more  about  the  world  and  its  inhabitants  at  his  own 
epoch,  than  any  historian  that  ever  lived. 

But  the  primary  and  principal  meaning  of  the  asser- 
tion is,  that  he  is  historical  as  to  manners,  customs, 
ideas,  and  institutions :  whereas  events  and  names  are 
the  pegs  on  which  they  hang.  It  is  with  respect,  not 
to  the  dry  bones  of  fact,  but  to  all  that  gives  them  life, 
beauty,  and  meaning,  that  he  has  supplied  us  with  a 
more  complete  picture  of  the  Greek,  or,  as  he  would 
probably  say,  Achaian,  people  of  his  time,  than  any 
other  author,  it  might  almost  be  said  than  any  number 
of  authors,  have  supplied  with  reference  to  any  other 
age  and  people. 

There  are  however  very  strong  presumptions  that 
Homer  is  also  historical  with  respect  to  his  chief 
events  and  persons.  For,  1.  It  is  the  chief  business 
of  the  Poet  or  Bard,  as  such,  in  early  times  to  record 
facts,  while  he  records  them  in  the  forms  of  beauty 


1  Od.  iv.  566-568  ;  xix.  206. 


8 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


supplied  by  his  art.  2.  Especially '  of  the  Bard  who 
lives' near  the  events  of  which  he  professes  to  sing. 
3.  It  is  plain  that  Homer  so  viewed  the  Poet's  office, 
from  the  nature  of  the  lays  which  he  introduces  ;  from 
his  representing  to  us  Achilles  engaged  in  singing  the 
deeds  of  heroes ; 1  and  from  his  saying  that  the  gods 
ordained  the  War  of  Troy  that  it  might  be  sung  to 
all  posterity  ; 2  with  other  like  sentiments.  4.  The 
Poems  were  always  viewed  as  historical  by  the  Greeks. 
5.  If  fictitious  in  their  basis,  they  would  have  been 
far  less  likely  to  acquire  and  maintain  such  command- 
ing interest.  6.  The  structure  and  tenor  of  the 
Poems  throughout  indicate  the  highest  regard  to  na- 
tional tastes  and  prepossessions  :  and  these  tastes  were 
manifestly  very  strong  as  to  all  matters  of  tradition  and 
hereditary  fame.  Of  this  we  have  an  indication  which 
may  be  taken  by  way  of  example,  in  the  question 
usually  put  to  a  stranger,  who  are  his  parents  ? 
7.  The  number  and  the  remarkable  self-consistency  of 
the  Genealogies  given  in  the  Poems,  appear  almost  of 
themselves  to  prove  an  historic  design.  8.  The  Cata- 
logue in  the  Second  Iliad  implies  a  purpose  with 
reference  to  the  nation,  much  the  same  as  that  indi- 
cated by  the  Genealogies  with  respect  to  particular 
persons  or  families.  9.  The  Aristeia  of  the  greater 
chieftains  respectively,  in  the  intermediate  Books  of 
the  Iliad,  are  thought  to  load  the  movement  of  the 
Poem ;  but  they  receive  a  natural  and  simple  explana- 
tion from  the  tendency  of  a  Poet  at  once  itinerant  and 
historical  to  distribute  carefully  the  honors  of  the  War 
between  the  different  States  and  heroes.    10.  A  con- 


i  II.  ix.  186-189. 


2  Od.  viii.  579. 


INTRODUCTION. 


9 


siderable  number  of  the  minute  particulars  given,  es- 
pecially in  the  Iliad,  are  of  a  nature  to  derive  'their 
interest  wholly  from  recording  matter  of  fact ;  such  for 
instance  as  the  small  stature  of  Tudeus,  the  mare 
driven  by  Menelaos,  and  many  more.  11.  Homer 
often  introduces  curious  legends  of  genealogy  and 
race,  in  a  manner  which  is  palpably  inopportune  for 
the  purposes  of  poetry,  and  which  is,  on  the  other 
hand,  fully  accounted  for  by  the  historic  aim.  These 
legends  are  not  to  be  explained  by  the  garrulity  of 
Nestor  ;  for,  even  if  the  character  of  Nestor  admitted 
of  a  garrulity  wholly  apart  from  good  sense,  still 
these  legends  are  not  confined  to  him.  Nor  are  they 
shared,  with  him  only  by  Phoenix,  who  is  likewise  in 
years  ;  they  are  spoken  by  iEneas,  Glaucos,  and  others, 
and  this  too  even  on  the  field  of  battle :  and,  by  means 
of  them,  Homer  has  supplied  us  with  a  great  mass  of 
curious  knowledge,  highly  interesting  to  his  auditors, 
and.  eminently  illustrative  of  the  first  beginnings  of  the 
Greek  nation,  as  yet  in  embryo.  His  intermixture  of 
supernatural  agency  with  human  events  must  be 
judged  on  its  own  grounds  ;  but  cannot  by  the  laws  of 
historical  criticism  be  held  of  itself  to  overthrow  his 
general  credit. 

We  must  not  however  attempt  to  define  with  rigor 
the  limits,  within  which  the  Poems  are  to  be  considered 
historical.  The  free  intermixture  of  the  supernatural 
need  not  indeed  constitute  a  serious  difficulty.  For 
the  theurgy  of  the  Poems  is,  so  to  speak,  self-subsist- 
ent.  It  represents  in  the  main  a  parallel  and  concur- 
rent action,  rather  than  a  mere  ornament,  or  a  simple 
portion  of  one  and  the  same  narration  with  the  War ; 
and  it  lies  upon  the  human  and  visible  tissue  like  a 


10 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


continuous  pattern  of  rich  embroidery.  But  several 
points  of  the  story  are  presented  to  us  in  a  dress  ap- 
parently mythical ;  for  example,  the  distribution  of  the 
time  into  three  periods,  each  of  ten  years :  and  many 
of  the  names  of  persons  appear  to  have  been  invented, 
especially  in  cases  where  they  carry  an  etymological 
meaning  calculated  directly  to  serve  the  purpose  of  the 
Poem.  Again,  if  we  suppose  an  historical  existence 
for  the  persons  indicated  by  the  names,  for  example, 
of  Achilles  and  Helen,  it  remains  open  to  doubt  how 
large  a  proportion  of  the  remarkable  and  characteristic 
features,  with  which  they  are  invested,  may  be  due  to 
the  imagination  of  the  Poet.  In  the  case  of  Achilles, 
whose  qualities  everywhere  border  on  the  superhuman, 
this  question  is  especially  relevant.  Nor  is  the  cir- 
cumstance to  be  overlooked,  that  a  goddess  is  assigned 
to  him  as  a  mother,  and  is  stated  to  have  sat  com- 
monly, or  oftentimes,  as  queen  in  his  father's  palace.1 

It  must  .also  be  fully  admitted  that,  although  the 
Troad  may  afford  some  physical  indications  favorable 
to  the  historic  character  of  the  Poems,  yet  the  proof  of 
that  character  chiefly,  nay  almost  wholly,  rests  upon 
internal  evidence.2  But  internal  evidence,  when  car- 
ried to  a  certain  point,  is  the  very  best  we  can  desire 
in  a  case  where  we  are  obliged  to  travel  back  into  the 
mist  of  ages,  far  beyond  the  limits  of  historical  record. 

Of  all  the  features  of  the  Homeric  Poems,  perhaps 
the  most  remarkable  are  the  delineations  of  personal 
character  which  they  contain.  They  are  not  only  in 
a  high  degree  varied  and  refined ;  but  they  are  also 
marvellously  comprehensive  and  profound.    The  proof 


i  II.  i.  396. 


2  Mure,  Literature  of  Greece,  vol.  i. 


INTRODUCTION. 


11 


of  their  extraordinary  excellence  as  works  of  art  is  to 
be  found  in  this,  that  from  Homer's  time  to  our  own, 
with  the  single  exception  of  the  works  of  Shakespeare, 
they  have  never  been  equalled. 

Homer  is  also  admirable,  when  the  specialties  of 
his  purpose  are  taken  into  view,  in  the  arrangement  of 
incidents  :  in  keeping  interest  ever  fresh :  in  his  pre- 
cise and  copious  observation  of  nature :  in  his  power 
of  illustration,  his  use  of  epithets ;  in  the  freedom, 
simplicity,  and  power  of  his  language  ;  and  in  a  ver- 
sification perfect  in  its  application  to  all  the  diversified 
forms  of  human  action,  speech,  and  feeling. 

It  may  probably  have  been  the  combined  and  intense 
effort  of  the  Trojan  War  by  which  the  Greeks  first  felt 
themselves,  and  first  became,  a  nation.  At  any  rate, 
from  that  epoch  appears  to  date  their  community  of 
interest  and  life.  Homer,  then,  was  hardly  less  won- 
derful in  the  fortune  of  his  opportunity,  than  in  the 
rarity  of  his  gifts.  In  speaking  of  his  theme,  the  two 
Poems  may  be  taken  as  virtually  one.  He  supplied  to 
his  country  thenceforward,  and  for  all  periods,  the  bond 
of  an  intellectual  communion,  and  a  common  treasure 
of  ideas  upon  all  the  great  subjects  in  which  man  is 
concerned.  He  was  not  only  the  glory  and  delight, 
but  he  was  in  a  great  degree  the  7101^9,  the  maker, 
of  his  nation. 

I  have  spoken  of  the  darkness  which,  as  far  as  direct 
testimony  is  concerned,  envelops  the  person  of  the 
Poet.  The  same  is  the  case  with  the  Homeric  Poems, 
distinguished  from  every  other  work  of  the  first  rank 
in  these  among  other  particulars :  there  is  not  one,  of 
which  so  little  has  been  told  us  by  contemporary  or 
early  testimony;  while  there  is  not  one  which  tells 


12 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


us  so  much.  Of  their  origin,  their  date,  and  their  first 
reception,  we  know  nothing,  except  so  far  as  we  can 
gather  it  from  themselves.  The  Cyclic  Poems,  which 
aimed  at  completing  the  circle  of  events  with  which 
they  deal,  never  attained  to  an  equal  or  competing  fame, 
and  have  long  ago  perished.  Periods  of  darkness, 
the  length  of  which  we  cannot  determine,  both  precede 
and  follow  the  two  great  productions.  At  the  dawn 
of  trustworthy  tradition,  we  find  them  holding  a  posi- 
tion of  honor  and  authority  among  the  Greeks,  for 
which,  with  respect  to  works  professedly  secular,  his- 
tory affords  no  parallel.1  The  Greeks  had  no  sacred 
books,  properly  so  called :  and  it  is  probable  that  the 
Poems  of  Homer  filled  in  some  particular  respects  the 
place  of  Sacred  Books2  for  that  people. 

By  the  Poems  of  Homer,  I  mean  the  Iliad  and  the 
Odyssey.  I  can  find  no  adequate  reason  for  assigning 
to  him  any  other  of  the  larger  compositions  of  the 
early  Greek  Bards.  Of  the  other  works  more  or  less 
reputed  to  be  Homeric,  not  one  can  now  be  ascribed  to 
him  with  confidence,  or  has  been  shown  ever  to  have 
been  so  ascribed  by  the  general  and  unhesitating  opin- 
ion of  the  Greeks.  The  Hymns  contain  very  few  pas- 
sages of  such  mark  as  even  to  allow  the  supposition 
that  they  could  have  proceeded  from  him.  Nor  do  they 
carry,  so  to  speak,  his  physiognomy.  No  writer  of  any 
period  has  borne  stronger  and  more  characteristic 
notes  of  style.  We  have  seen  that  one  beautiful  pas- 
sage is  quoted  from  the  Hymn  to  Apollo,  by  Thucy- 
dides.  He  describes  that  Hymn  as  a  Hymn  of  Homer ; 

1  The  case  which  comes  nearest  to  this  is,  perhaps,  that  of  the 
Divina  Commedia  of  Dante. 

2  Milman,  Life  of  Horace,  p.  1 ;'  Grote,  Hist,  of  Greece,  vol.  1. 


INTRODUCTION. 


13 


and  doubtless  he  represents  a  tradition  of  his  day. 
There  are  also  one  or  two  fragmentary  verses  ascribed 
to  Homer  :  one  passage,  in  particular,  is  given  by  Aris- 
totle,1 and  said  to  have  been  taken  from  a  poem  termed 
The  Margites.  It  may  be  observed  that  besides  their 
general  inferiority,  the  Hymns  in  general  embody 
mythological  traditions,  evidently  of  a  later  stamp 
than  those  of  the  two  great  Epics. 

The  Iliad  and  Odyssey  give  a  picture  of  the  age  to 
which  they  refer,  alike  copious  and  animated,  compre- 
hensive and  minute.  The  Iliad  represents  that  age  in 
its  vigor ;  the  Odyssey  paints  it  in  the  beginning 
of  its  decline,  when  Greece  had  been  unsettled  and 
disorganized  by  the  prolonged  absence  of  its  chiefs  at 
Troy.  The  Iliad  gives  us  what  it  had  been  ;  the 
Odyssey  indicates  what  it  was  about  to  be.  The  de- 
lineations embrace  jointly  all  the  materials  that  human 
life  and  society  could  then  in  their  simplicity  supply : 
when  writing  was  either  unknown  or  unavailable,  when 
civil  rights  had  not  begun  to  take  the  form  of  law,  and 
when  visible  Art,  in  its  higher  sense,  was  an  exotic 
not  yet  naturalized  in  Greece.  In  a  manner  chiefly 
incidental,  there  is  supplied  to  us  a  mass  of  informa- 
tion on  history  and  legend,  religion,  polity,  justice, 
domestic  life  and  habits,  ethnical  and  social  relations, 
the  conditions  of  warfare,  navigation,  industry,  and 
of  the  useful  arts,  exceeding  in  amount  what  has 
ever  at  any  other  period  been  brought  for  us  into 
one  focus  by  a  single  mind  ;  except  possibly  by  the 
philosophical  works  of  Aristotle,  if  we  possessed  them 
entire. 


1  Eth.  Nicom.,  vi.  7. 


14 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


It  has  been  doubted1  at  various  times  whether  either 
Poem,  and  especially  whether  the  Iliad,  was  the  work 
of  a  single  author ;  and  also  whether  the  two  were  due 
to  the  same  hand.  The  Chorizontes,  so  called  because 
they  separate  the  authorship  of  the  Iliad  from  that  of 
the  Odyssey,  found  themselves  mainly, 

(a)  On  supposed  discrepancies  in  the  mythology  of 
the  two  Poems  respectively : 

(b)  On  differences  of  manners  and  institutions  : 
(<?)  On  differences  in  the  language. 

Those  who  destroy  the  unity  of  the  Poems,  and  es- 
pecially of  the  Iliad,  altogether,  contend, 

(a)  That  the  art  of  writing  did  not  exist  at  the 
time  of  their  composition,  and  that  poems  of  such 
length  could  not  have  been  orally  transmitted.  This 
was  the  famous  argument  of  Wolf. 

(6)  That  there  are  such  discrepancies,  anomalies, 
and  defects  of  plan,  in  the  Iliad,  as  to  preclude  the 
belief  that  it  could  be  the  work  of  a  single  mind. 

With  respect  to  the  argument  of  Wolf,  it  is  now 
commonly  admitted  that  no  such  art  of  writing  ex- 
isted, as  could  be  available  for  the  transmission  of  the 
Poems:  but  his  second  proposition,  that  they  could 
not  be  transmitted  orally,  is  also  very  commonly 
denied.  Quintilian  says, 4  Invenio  apud  Platonem  ob- 
stare  memoriae  usum  literarum.' 2  Even  in  the  period 
when  the  exercise  of  the  memory  had  become  subject 
to  this  disadvantage,  Niceratos,  according  to  Xeno- 
phon,3  stated  that  he  knew  the  Iliad  and  Odyssey  by 

1  See  the  account  of  the  controversy  from  its  earliest  phase  among 
the  Alexandrian  Critics,  in  Mure,  Hist,  of  Greek  Lit.  vol.  i.  ch.  ii. 
iii.  iv. 

2  xi.  2.  3  Sympos.  iii.  5. 


INTRODUCTION. 


15 


heart :  and  Athenasus 1  states,  that  Cassander,  king  of 
Macedon,  could  do  nearly  as  much ;  he  could  repeat 
the  chief  part  of  the  Poems.  Even  now,  it  would  not 
be  difficult  to  select  youths,  of  strong  memory,  aided 
by  poetic  feeling,  who,  if  they  made  it  a  profes- 
sion, would  be  able  to  acquire  by  heart  the  whole  of 
them :  which  however  need  not  have  been  done  by  all 
those  who  recited  them  under  a  system  apparently 
organized  with  a  view  to  recitation  in  parts. 

As  respects  the  other  heads  of  argument  against  the 
unity  of  the  Poems  generally,  it  may  be  sufficient  for 
the  present  to  reply  as  follows :  — 

(a)  The  plot  of  the  Iliad  (as  will  be  shown)  is  ad- 
mirably constructed  for  its  purpose. 

(6)  Its  internal  discrepancies  are  both  very  few,  and 
very  insignificant. 

(c)  Some  of  the  cases  of  alleged  discrepancy  are 
only  such  when  the  canons  of  modern  prose  are  applied 
precipitately  as  the  criteria  of  the  oldest  poetry. 

As  regards  the  arguments  of  the  Chorizontes  or 
separators  of  the  authorship  of  the  two  Epics,  let  it  be 
observed :  — 

(a)  If  the  mythology  of  the  Odyssey,  in  that  region 
to  which  the  voyage  of  Odysseus  belongs,  shall  be 
shown  to  be  Phoenician,2  the  whole  argument  from 
discrepancy  in  that  mythology  will  thereupon  disap- 
pear. 

(6)  The  differences  in  manners  or  institutions  are 
not  greater  than  may  be  explained  by  the  action  of  a 
revolutionary  crisis,  like  the  crisis  caused  by  the  pro- 

1  xiv.  p.  620. 

2  See  infra,  Chap.  V.  on  the  Phoenicians ;  and  Chap.  VII.  on 
Mythology,  sect.  Poseidon. 


16 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


longed  absence  in  Troas ;  and  are  really  such  as  may 
be  taken  rather  for  an  evidence  of  unity  in  authorship 
than  the  reverse. 

(c)  Some  differences  of  language  between  the  two 
Poems  is  required  by  the  different  character  of  the 
subjects :  and  the  actual  differences  seem  not  to  be 
thought  by  scholars  in  general  to  betoken  their  be- 
longing to  different  ages. 

(d)  A  careful  comparison  of  style  between  the  Odys- 
sey and  the  Iliad,  and  of  a  number  of  particulars  of 
turn  and  manner,  will  be  found  to  supply  a  consider- 
able amount  of  very  specific  evidence  for  the  unity  of 
authorship.  No  such  resemblances  could  be  shown 
to  the  works  of  any  other  author,  or  to  the  Pseudo- 
Homeric  compositions. 

(e)  Those  characters  of  the  Iliad,  which  are  also 
found  in  the  Odyssey,  reappear  in  the  later  Poem  with 
a  perfect  preservation  of  identity,  confirmed,  not  im- 
paired, by  the  altered  shading  which  belongs  to  their 
altered  positions. 

(/)  The  testimony  of  the  Odyssey  to  facts,  especially 
those  connected  with  the  war,  is  in  no  case  discordant 
with  that  of  the  Iliad.  For  if  the  manhood  of  Neop- 
tolemos1  creates  a  certain  amount  of  difficulty,  we 
should  bear  in  mind  that  the  adjustment  of  time  with 
reference  to  the  Poem,  appears  to  be  one  of  the  points 
in  which  Homer  has  allowed  himself  a  certain  license, 
with  a  view  probably  to  poetical  effect. 

(#)  But  the  overwhelming  proof  of  the  unity  of  au- 
thorship, both  for  each  Poem,  and.  as  between  the  two, 
is  really  supplied  by  the  innumerable  particulars  of 


1  Od.  xi.  506. 


INTRODUCTION. 


17 


manners,  institutions,  and  ideas,  which  pervade  both 
the  Iliad  and  the  Odyssey  with  a  marvellous  consist- 
ency ;  and  by  the  incommunicable  stamp  of  an  ex- 
traordinary genius  which  they  carry  throughout.  If 
discrepancies  exist,  the  difficulty  they  present  is  not 
only  small,  but  infinitesimal,  compared  with  the  diffi- 
culty of  that  hypothesis  which  assumes  that  Greece  pro- 
duced in  early  times  a  multitude  of  Homers,  and  all  of* 
them  with  the  very  same  stamp  of  mind.  Whether  in 
short  we  consider  these  works  as  poetry  or  as  record,  the 
marks  of  their  unity  are  innumerable  and  ineffaceable. 
A  part  of  their  force  is  sensible  to  the  ordinary  reader  ; 
but  it  will  be  felt;  constantly  and  immensely  to  increase 
in  proportion  as  the  reader  becomes  the  student,  by 
virtue  of  a  patient,  constant,  and  thorough  examina- 
tion of  the  text. 

Of  the  two  Poems,  it  seems  to  me  that,  while  both 
are  wonderful,  the  Iliad  is  without  doubt  the  greater. 
The  plot  of  the  Iliad,  we  shall  find,  is  a  marvellous 
combination  of  poetical  skill  with  national  spirit  and 
practical  prudence.  The  plot  of  the  Odyssey,  at  first 
sight  more  organized  and  symmetrical,  is  in  the  first 
place  of  far  easier  construction,  and  in  the  second,  is 
wound  up  in  a  manner  which  is  feeble  if  not  slovenly. 
The.  suspicions  of  the  genuineness  of  the  Twenty-fourth 
Book  appear  to  me  on  the  whole  to  be  tolerably  met  by 
a  general  conformity  of  turn  and  handling,  though 
with  diminished  force  ;  and  by  many  minute  particu- 
lars of  correspondence  which,  here  as  elsewhere,  the 
text  supplies.  But  they  have  perhaps  been  reasonably 
suggested  by  a  perceptible  inferiority  of  workmanship 
in  this  and,  with  some  exceptions,  in  several  Books 
preceding  it.     The  vigor  of  the  Iliad,  on  the  other 

2 


18 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


hand,  continues  quite  unabated  to  the  end.  Again,  in 
the  Odyssey  there  is  not  a  mere  decline  of  vigor:  the 
plan  of  the  ending  may  be  called  degenerate  and  in- 
complete. The  ends  of  some  of  the  threads  are 
dropped.  If  ever  a  peace  was  patched  it  is  that  which 
is  announced  in  the  closing  passage.  The  intervention 
of  Mentor,  even  though  his  exterior  conceals  a  deity, 
is  not  what  the  dignity  of  the  Sovereign  or  the  gran- 
deur of  Odysseus  would  require.  And  the  unexplained 
as  well  as  unfulfilled  prophecy ]  of  the  war,  suggests 
that  Homer  had  poetical  intentions  to  which  it  was  not 
permitted  him  to  give  effect. 

Generally  speaking,  the  Odyssey  displays  the  same 
powers  as  the  Iliad,  but  in  less  energetic  manifesta- 
tion. A  faculty  of  debate,  never  surpassed  if  ever 
equalled  in  human  history,  is  found  in  both  ;  but 
though  the  flight  of  Odysseus  in  the  Seventh  Odyssey 
is,  like  that  of  the  contention  in  the  First  Iliad,  a  lofty 
one,  it  cannot  be  compared  with  the  wonderful  speech 
of  Achilles  in  the  tent-scene  of  the  Ninth.  Again  ;  no 
man  but  Homer  could  have  reproduced  in  the  Odyssey 
to  the  life  the  characters  of  the  Iliad,  or  could  have 
added  the  specific  shading  of  their  altered  circum- 
stances. But  though  Homer  in  each  is  stronger  than 
any  other  of  the  Ancients,  yet  Homer  of  the  Iliad  is 
Homer  at  the  height  and  maximum  of  his  power  in 
this  transcendent  quality  ;  while  in  the  Odyssey  the 
great  luminary  seems  to  have  just  begun  his  descending 
course. 

Next  comes  the  question  how  far  we  may  reckon 
on  having  substantially  the  same  text  as  that  of  our 


i  Od.  xi.  127  ;  xxiii.  275. 


INTRODUCTION. 


19 


author  ;  not  as  to  any  minor  detail,  nor  even  so  as 
to  exclude  occasional  interpolations,  but  as  to  the  style, 
diction,  and  language  generally. 

Mr.  Paley 1  says  (not  that  the  Greek  of  the  Iliad 
is  greatly  different  from  that  of  the  Odyssey,  but) 
that  we  find  in  the  Poems  two  distinct  and  separate 
phases  of  the  Greek  tongue :  first,  the  language  of 
the  earliest  Trojan  Epics,  and  secondly,  the  ordinary 
Ionic  of  the  time  of  Herodotus,  with  a  mixture  of 
Attic  idioms.  The  question  is  one  evidently  requir- 
ing minute  examination  ;  but  it  is  beyond  my  compe- 
tency to  decide.    I  would  observe,  however, 

(a)  That  in  an  author  who  composed  at  a  period  of 
crisis,  when  all  the  elements  of  the  Hellenic  nation, 
that  was  to  be,  were  settling  down,  we  should  look  for, 
or  at  least  should  not  be  startled  by,  some  mixture  of 
older  and  younger  forms. 

(&)  That  considerable  changes  of  the  minor  order 
might  be  made  in  the  text  of  the  Poems  without 
seriously  affecting  the  substance,  if  there  was  a  great 
and  constant  anxiety  to  abide  by  the  true  sense  of 
Homer. 

(<?)  That  if  we  find  the  internal  evidence  as  to  man- 
ners, institutions,  and  facts,  singularly  self-consistent, 
this  goes  far  to  show  that  alterations  of  the  text  have 
been  generally  confined  within  merely  verbal  and  nar- 
row limits. 

(d)  The  antiquity  of  the  present  text  is  not  over- 
thrown by  the  fact  that  the  later  poets  in  many  in- 
stances have  followed  other  forms  of  legend  in  regard 
to  the  T  r  o  i  c  a :  for  they  would  necessarily  consult  the 


i  Athenamm,  Aug.  10,  1867. 


20 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


state  of  popular  feeling  from  time  to  time  ;  and  tradi- 
tion, which,  as  to  religion,  altered  so  greatly  after  the 
time  of  Homer,  would,  as  to  facts  and  persons,  it  is 
evident,  vary  materially  according  to  the  sympathies 
of  blood  and  otherwise  at  different  periods  of  Greek 
history.  The  displacement  of  the  Achaians,  and  the 
rise  of  the  Dorians  and  lonians,  must  have  occa- 
sioned great  changes  in  this  respect.  It  is  also  sur- 
prising, if  such  difference  in  the  language  really  exists 
as  is  alleged  by  Mr.  Paley,  that  it  was  not  perceived 
by  the  Greeks  of  the  classic  period,  who  must  surely  be 
allowed  to  have  known  their  own  tongue. 

There  are  passages  of  ancient  writers,  which  tend  to 
the  disintegration  of  Homer.  But  they  are  late,  and 
of  small  authority.  Josephus1  says  it  was  reported, 
or  thought,  that  from  want  of  the  aid  afforded  by  the 
art  of  writing  there  were  many  discrepancies  in  the 
Poems.  This  was  merely  a  current  opinion,  not  of 
himself  but  of  others,  on  the  state  of  the  text ;  an 
opinion  which  we  can  for  ourselves  see  to  have  been 
erroneous.  The  Scholiast  on  Pindar2  reports,  and 
only  reports,  that  Kunaithos  and  his  school  had  made 
large  interpolations.  The  Latin  authors,  such  as 
Cicero  or  Paterculus,  must  be  considered  as  giving 
their  opinions,  which  cannot  from  the  circumstances 
•be  of  great  critical  weight,  rather  than  as  witnesses 
in  the  case. 

The  external  evidence  to  a  contrary  effect,  though 
fragmentary,  is  more  considerable,  and  for  the  most 
part  of  much  earlier  date.     Heraclides  Ponticus 3  a 

i  Contr.  Ap.  i.  2.  2  Nem.  ii.  1. 

3  Fragm.  irepl  ttoIlteiuv. 


INTRODUCTION. 


21 


pupil  of  Plato,  declares  that  Lycurgus  obtained  the 
Homeric  Poems  from  the  descendants  of  Kreophulos, 
and  was  the  first  to  bring  them  into  Peloponnesos. 
iElian  1. makes  the  slight  but  material  addition,  that  he 
brought  this  poetry  in  a  mass  (ddgoav).  Plato  states 
in  the  Republic  2  that  Kreophulos  was  a  companion  of 
Homer  ;  Strabo,3  that  he  was  a  Samian  ;  Diogenes 
Laertius,4  that  Hermodamas,  the  master  of  Pythagoras, 
was  his  descendant.  Plutarch  5  states  that  some  por- 
tions of  Homer  were  known  in  Greece  before  Lycurgus 
brought  the  whole  from  Crete. 

Herodotus 6  states  that  Cleisthenes,  the  tyrant  of 
Sicyon,  when  he  had  been  at  war  with  Argos,  put  a 
stop  to  the  competitions  of  the  rhapsodists  in  Sicyon, 
because  the  Homeric  songs  turned  chiefly  upon  the 
Argeians  and  Argos  (on  "Aoyuol  rs  xal  Idgyog  ret  Ttolla 
Tidvra  vfivsarai).  Also,  that  he  sought  to  banish  from 
Sicyon  the  memory  of  Adrestos,  as  being  an  Argive 
hero.  Now  the  Iliad  describes  Greece  not  seldom  un- 
der the  title  of  Argos,  and  the  Greeks  frequently  as 
Argeians ;  and  it  represents  Adrestos  as  the  first  king 
of  Sicyon,  while  at  the  same  time  it  represents  him  as 
the  father-in-law  or  grandfather-in-law,  of  Diomed  the 
Argive  chieftain. 

From  this  passage  it  appears,  — 

(a)  That  there  were  at  Sicyon,  six  centuries  before 
Christ,  State-recitations  of  the  Homeric  Poems,  at- 
tended with  prizes. 

(5)  That  they  are  not  named  as  peculiar  to  Sicyon, 


i  Var.  Hist.  xiii.  14. 
3  xiv.  p.  946. 
5  Lyc.  p.  41. 


2  Rep.  x.  p.  600  B. 
4  viii.  2. 
6  v.  67. 


22 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


but  rather  as  a  customary  institution,  set  aside  in 
that  place  at  a  certain  epoch  on  special  grounds. 

(c)  That  the  recitations  depended  chiefly  on  the 
Homeric  Poems ;  for  they  ceased  when  these  were 
prohibited. 

Dieuchidas  of  Megara,  an  author  placed  by  Heyne 
after  the  time  of  Alexander  the  Great,  is  quoted  by 
Diogenes1  as  stating  that  Solon  provided  by  law  for 
the  recitation  of  the  Homeric  poems  e|  vrtofiolijg,  one 
reciter  taking  up  another ;  and  therefore  that  Solon 
did  more  than  Peisistratos  to  throw  light  upon  the 
Poet.  And  Lycurgus  the  orator,  who  was  contempo- 
rary with  Demosthenes, 2  tells  the  Athenian  people 
that  their  forefathers  thought  of  him  so  highly  as  to 
provide  by  law  for  the  recitation  of  his  songs,  and  his 
alone,  quinquennially  at  the  Panathenaica ;  and  such, 
he  adds,  was  then  the  valor  of  their  ancestors,  that 
the  Spartans  took  Tyrtseus 3.  from  among  them  to  be 
their  general. 

Hence  it  appears  that  — 

(a)  According  to  Lycurgus,  Homer  was  recited  at 
Athens  in  the  time  of  Tyrtseus,  nearly  seven  centuries 
before  Christ. 

(5)  Just  when  Athens  begins  to  rise,  Solon  appoints 
by  public  law  competitive  recitations  of  Homer,  to  be 
taken  in  turn  by  the  reciters. 

(<?)  And  of  Homer  alone. 

Q$)  It  appears  negatively  that  probably  there  were 
recitations  at  Athens  before  Solon,  but  without  reg- 
ular turns. 


1  Diog.  Laert.  i.  57.  2  In  Leocritum,  104-8. 

3  Smith's  Diet.,  art.  Tyrtaeus. 


INTRODUCTION . 


23 


(e)  If  public  authority  thus  established  the  recita- 
tion of  the  Poems,  we  may  rest  assured  that  care  was 
taken,  as  far  as  possible,  to  preserve  their  text  from 
corruption. 

(/)  The  vanity  or  carelessness  of  a  particular  rhap- 
sodist  would  tend  to  corrupt  them ;  but  the  matches 
were  free  and  competitive,  and  each  reciter  would  be 
watched  and  checked  by  the  vigilant  jealousy  of  his 
rivals.  This  element  of  competition  would  in  all 
likelihood  have  a  highly  conservative  effect,  before  the 
art  of  writing  had  come  into  use.  And  it  is  plain, 
from  II.  ii.  594-600,  that  the  practice  prevailed  from 
before  the  time  of  Homer  himself;  as  he  tells  us  that 
Thamuris  had  challenged  the  Muses  to  compete  with 
him,  and  was  punished  accordingly  for  his  audacity. 
Hesiod  witnesses  to  the  matches,  and  says  that  in 
Aulis  he  himself  won  a  tripod.1  Thucydides  also 
finds  proof  of  them  in  the  Hymn  to  Apollo.2 

(#)  In  a  word,  while  there  were  at  work  what  may 
be  called  centrifugal  forces,  tending  to  impair  and 
vitiate  the  text  of  the  Poems,  there  were  also  centri- 
petal forces  tending  to  restore  it ;  in  the  rivalry  of 
States  as  well  as  of  Bards,  in  the  intense  love  of  the 
song  of  Homer  felt  by  every  Greek,  and  in  the  great 
value  set  by  the  whole  people  upon  it  as  a  record. 

When  we  come  down  to  the  historic  period,  we 
find  in  it  full  evidence  of  the  standing  anxiety  both  of 
States  and  persons  to  preserve  the  text  of  Homer.  It 
appears  probable  that  a  common  text  was  more  or  less 
recognized,  while  many  even  of  the  Greek  Colonies 
had  their  public  or  State  Recensions.    Individuals  of 


i  Opp.  654-657. 


2  Hymn  Apoll.  146-150,  166-173. 


24 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


eminence,  or  of  literary  taste,  had  their  editions  also. 
The  Venetian  Scholiast  constantly  refers  to  these  two 
descriptions  of  copies,  and  while  the  references  prove 
that  there  were  in  this,  as  in  every  ancient  document, 
many  variations  of  text,  they  also  show  that  such 
variations  were  confined  within  narrow  limits,  and 
did  not  affect  the  body  of  the  work.  The  State 
editions  were  called  at  Ttohzmal,  at  ex  roov  nolmv,  at 
arto  TtoXewv :  those  prepared  for  individuals  at  Mar'  avdga : 
and  a  third  class,  got  up  apparently  for  public  sale, 
and  of  very  variable  quality,  were  at  mivosi,  at  d^onxai, 
at  diftxcodeig. 

Among  the  public  or  State  Kecensions,  we  hear  of 
those  of  Crete,  Argos,  Sinope,  Marseilles,  Chios,  Cyprus  ; 
the  Aiolis  or  Aiolike,  a  name  which  may  perhaps 
indicate  the  recognized  text  of  what  is  called  Homer's 
iEolian  Greek ;  the  Recension  of  the  Mouseion,  or  de- 
pository near  the  School  at  Alexandria;  and  the 
Kuklike,  which  is  supposed  to  mean  an  edition  where- 
in Homer  appeared  with  other  poems  of  the  Cycle. 

It  seems  very  probable,  that  the  work  of  Peisistratos 
was  in  substance  a  critical  recension  of  the  text  effected 
by  a  comparison  of  different  versions,  and  a  complete 
publication  by  authority  of  the  several  portions  of  the 
Poems  in  the  order  in  which  we  now  have  them ;  in 
fact  that  it  was  an  early  and  notable  example  of  the 
reactive  tendency  to  preserve  the  text  by  recurrence 
to  a  standard,  and  to  check  its  variations,  which  I  have 
mentioned  as  the  natural  counterpoise  to  disintegrat- 
ing agencies. 

We  have  no  clear  account  of  the  proceedings  of 
Peisistratos  ;  but  we  know  that  when,  at  a  later  period, 
the  Alexandrian  School  of  Zenodotos,  Aristophanes, 


INTRODUCTION. 


25 


and  Aristarchos  brought  the  best  critical  power  of  the 
time  to  bear  upon  the  Poems,  they  found  comparatively 
little  to  question.  Nor  have  the  suspicions  they  enter- 
tained of  particular  passages  since  received  any  thing 
approaching  to  an  unanimous  approval. 

As  to  more  general  reconstructions,  it  is  allowed 
that  the  Odyssey  does  not  admit  of  them ;  and  such 
as  have  been  proposed  with  regard  to  the  Iliad  have 
manifestly  failed  to  obtain  any  sensible,  much  more 
any  permanent,  amount  of  assent. 

But  the  strongest  argument  for  the  soundness  of 
the  text,  as  well  as  that  for  the  unity  of  the  Poems, 
hangs  upon  internal  evidence.  I  do  not  hesitate  to 
say  that  no  work  known  to  me  presents,  in  any  degree 
equal  or  approaching  to  these  Poems,  the  proof,  in 
kind  among  the  strongest  of  all,  which  arises  out  of 
natural  unstudied  self-consistency  in  detail.  The 
particulars  in  which  the  text  confirms  at  one  point 
what  it  conveys  at  another  may  be  counted  by  many 
thousands  :  those , where  it  appears  to  be  inconsistent 
are  but  a  few  units  to  be  reckoned  by  the  primitive 
process  of  Proteus  upon  the  fingers.  Errors  undoubt- 
edly there  must  be.  Still,  if  they  were  very  serious,  it 
is  impossible  but  that  a  far  greater  number  of  them 
must  have  been  tracked  out,  and  their  detection 
established  to  the  general  satisfaction  of  cultivated 
men.  On  one  portion  only  of  the  Forty-eight  Books, 
namely  the  close  of  the  Odyssey,  has  there  been  thrown 
what  may  be  termed  grave  or  recognized  doubt ;  and 
even  here  doubt  is  all  that  can  be  reasonably  sus- 
tained. Indeed,  over  and  above  correspondence  of 
tangible  particulars,  there  is  what  I  must  call  an  unity 
of  atmosphere  in  the  Poems,  such  as  I  believe  has 
never  been  achieved  by  forgery  or  imitation. 


26 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


In  this  chapter  I  have  not  relied  upon  the  tradition 
according  to  which  Lycurgus,  the  great  Spartan  law- 
giver, brought  the  Poems  into  use  in  Lacedsemon,  be- 
cause it  is  one  belonging  to  the  Roman  rather  than  the 
Greek  period.  On  the  other  hand  I  cannot  attach 
great  weight  to  the  statement  in  the  Hipparchos,1 
which  assigns  to  that  Sovereign  the  original  introduction 
of  the  Poems  into  Attica.  It  appears  simply  incredible 
that  the  Poems  should  have  been  unknown  in  Attica, 
when  we  learn  from  Herodotus  that  they  had  long 
before  been  recited  in  Sicyon. 

On  the  whole,  then,  we  are  not  in  every  case  dog- 
matically to  assert  that  each  line  of  the  Poems  as  they 
stand  is  the  work  of  Homer  ;  but  while  fairly  weigh- 
ing the  evidence  in  the  comparatively  few  cases  where 
doubt  sustained  by  argument  has  been  raised,  we  may, 
*  as  a  general  rule,  proceed  to  handle  the  text  with  a 
reasonable  confidence,  that  the  ground  is  firm  under 
our  feet ;  a  confidence,  which  experience  in  the  work 
will,  I  think,  be  found  progressively  to  confirm. 

Thus  far  we  have  seen  reason  to  suppose  that  the 
Iliad  and  the  Odyssey  are  the  work  of  a  Poet  who  lived 
at  a  date  that  we  are  unable  to  define  otherwise  than 
by  its  nearness  to  the  Trojan  War ;  an  event  which,  if 
we  attempt  to  measure  its  distance  from  the  historic 
era  by  manners  and  institutions,  we  must  hold  to  be  of 
a  high  antiquity. 

At  times  it  has  been  questioned,  whether  Homer  or 
Hesiod  was  the  older  poet.  We  know  of  Hesiod  that 
while  the  reputed  authors  of  the  Cyclic  Poems  belong 
to  the  historic  era,2  he  is  pre-historic ;  and  we  must 


1  Sect.  iv. 


2  Mure,  Lit.  of  Greece,  ii.  282. 


INTRODUCTION. 


2T 


seek,  therefore,  in  his  works,  as  in  those  of  Homer, 
for  the  means  of  estimating  his  probable  6  whereabout' 
in  the  deep  mist  of  ages.  He  gives  us  no  sign  that 
the  instrument  of  writing  had  become  available  at  his 
epoch  for  the  preservation  of  poetry  ;  and  if  his  com- 
positions, as  being  much  shorter,  taxed  the  memory 
more  lightly,  on  the  other  hand  we  have  no  reason 
to  believe  that  they  were  watched  with  the  same  jeal- 
ous care  to  preserve,  or  to  recover,  the  genuine  text. 
But  if  the  episode  of  the  Five  Ages  be  genuine,  they 
are  decisive  of  the  question.  For  the  composer  of  it 
had  been  witness  to  an  iron  age  ;  and  iron,  as  com- 
pared with  copper,  had  in  his  time  come  to  be  the 
inferior,  that  is  to  say  the  cheaper,  metal.  The  use 
of  it  therefore  must  have  grown  common,  as  from 
remains  still  extant,  it  had  evidently  come  to  be  com- 
mon in  Assyria  at  a  period  supposed  to  be  about  the  * 
eighth  century  before  Christ.  Homer  lived  at  a  period, 
as  defined  by  economic  laws,  much  earlier  ;  at  a  time 
when  the  use  of  iron  was  but  just  commencing,  when 
the  commodity  was  rare,  and  when  its  value  was  very 
great.  This  argument  appears  to  me  so  conclusive 
as  to  the  comparative  dates,  that  I  forbear  to  dwell  on 
other  particulars,  or  upon  the  considerable  difference 
in  the  manners  of  the  Hesiodic,  as  compared  with  the 
Homeric,  Poems. 

We  have  also  seen  that  in  the  state  of  primitive  so- 
ciety it  was  essential  to  the  business  of  the  Epic  Bard 
to  commemorate,  in  poetic  forms,  actual  events  ;  and 
that  the  works  of  Homer  prove  how  he  kept  this  prop 
erty  of  his  art  constantly  in  mind. 

Viewing  then  his  position  in  human  history  and  his 
profession,  we  find  that  he  is  an  original  and  a  solitary, 


28 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


as  he  is  also  a  most  copious,  witness  to  the  condition  of 
mankind,  and  especially  of  the  Greeks,  at  a  period  to 
which  we  have  no  other  direct  literary  access.  Tradi- 
tions there  are  in  abundance,  reported  by  Apollodorus 
in  mass,  or  scattered  here  or  there  through  the  works 
of  earlier  writers ;  and  these  traditions  may,  in  any 
given  case,  contain  matter  relating  to  the  age  of  Ho- 
mer, or  to  what  preceded  him,  and  may  even  in  some 
cases  be  true,  or  nearer  the  truth  than  his.  But  they 
carry  as  a  general  rule  no  attestation  ;  and  their  con- 
fused and  promiscuous  nature  marks  them  as  a  miscel- 
lany gradually  accumulated  in  many  ages  and  from 
many  lands.  I  submit  then  that  we  ought  to  make 
the  evidence  of  Homer,  in  relation  to  his  age  and  to 
what  had  gone  before,  a  separate  study,  and  to  assign 
to  it  a  primary  authority.  The  testimony  of  later 
writers  should  be  handled  in  subordination  to  it,  and  in 
general  even  tried  by  it  as  by  a  touchstone,  on  all  the 
subjects  which  it  embraces.  It  will  be  seen,  as  we  pro- 
ceed to  deal  with  the  contents  of  the  Poems,  that  this 
is  a  proposition  fruitful  of  important  results  as  regards 
the  religion,  the  polity,  and  the  manners  of  early 
Greece. 

In  asking  for  the  testimony  of  Homer  a  primary 
authority,  I  refer  only  to  those  cases  where  it  stands 
in  competition  with  other,  and  in  truth  inferior,  liter- 
ary evidence.  The  evidence  of  fact,  whether  in  geo- 
graphy and  topography,  in  language  or  in  archaeology, 
stands  upon  its  own  ground,  and  Homer,  like  every 
other  author,  must  yield,  if  a  conflict  arise,  to  its  more 
cogent  authority. 

I  will  give  a  single  example  of  the  discrepancy  be- 
tween the  Homeric,  and  the  later,  representations  of  the 


INTRODUCTION. 


29 


early  Greek  ethnology.  According  to  a  tradition 
founded  in  part  upon  Apollodoros,1  in  part  upon  a 
fragment  ascribed  by  Tzetzes  to  Hesiod,2  Deucalion 
was  the  son  of  Prometheus,  and  a  certain  Hellen  was 
the  son  of  Deucalion.  Hellen  had  three  sons,  Aiolos, 
Doros,  and  Xouthos  ;  and  Xouthos  again  had  two  sons, 
Ion  and  Achaios. 

It  is  impossible  not  to  be  struck  with  the  convenient 
adaptation,  speaking  generally,  of  this  tradition  to  the 
reputed  descent  and  succession  of  the  various  Greek 
races,  so  as  to  give  to  each  its  share  of  fame  and  its 
order  of  seniority.  All  Greeks  were  Hellenes,  so 
Hellen  is  made  the  father  of  them  all.  The  oldest 
among  these  names  in  the  Greek  tradition  is  Aiolos  ; 
so  an  Aiolos  is  made  the  eldest  son  of  Hellen.  The 
great  dominant  race  of  the  first  historic  ages  of  Greece 
was  the  Dorian ;  accordingly,  Doros  is  the  second  son 
of  Hellen.  The  Ionians,  represented  by  Attica,  came 
later  to  their  repute  and  power ;  so  they,  and  the 
Achaians  to  whom  they  gave  a  refuge  after  the  Dorian 
conquest,  appear  as  the  children  of  the  third  and  young- 
est son.  This  tradition  may  be  properly  viewed  as  a 
pretty  piece  of  joinery.  But  Mure 3  has  with  justice 
observed  that  the  name  Hellen  bears  witness  against 
itself,  being  apparently  derived  from  the  territorial 
name  Hellas,  and  that  in  its  turn  from  the  Helloi. 
When  we  bring  this  tradition,  thus  discredited  by  in- 
ternal evidence,  to  the  bar  of  Homer,  we  find  him  in 
discord  with  it  on  every  point.  Of  Hellen  as  a  person 
he  knows  nothing:  the  name  would  to  all  appear- 

1  Lib.  vii.  2,  3.  2  Fragm.  xxviii.  ap.  Tzetz.  ad  Lye.  284. 

3  Lit.  of  Greece,  vol.  i.  p.  39  n. 


30 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


ance  have  meant  in  his  ear  most  properly  an  inhabi- 
tant of  Southern  Thessaly.  Aiolos,  if  named  by  him 
at  all,  is  named  as  a  foreigner  ;  while  only  particular 
families,  not  a  tribe  descended  from  him,  are  indicated 
as  having  borne  or  bearing  rule  in  parts  of  Greece. 
Doros  is  wholly  unknown  to  him  ;  and  the  Dorians  are 
a  portion,  apparently  an  obscure  portion  at  the  time,  of 
the  inhabitants  of  Crete.  Of  Xouthos  we  have  no 
trace  whatever ;  in  fact  this  whole  family  is,  as  such, 
utterly  non-existent.  There  is  no  Ion  ;  and  the  Iaones 
who  appear  as  settled  in  the  Attica  of  Homer,  are 
without  any  tribal  eponymist.  Again,  there  is  no  trace 
of  an  Achaios  ;  but  the  name  Achaioi  is  the  dominant 
name  of  the  period,  and  the  crown  of  its  celebrity. 

Such,  exhibited  by  an  example,  is  the  contrariety 
between  Homeric  and  post-Homeric  tradition.  We 
shall  see  in  due  time  what  materials  the  text  of  Homer 
can  contribute  towards  the  construction  of  the  ethnol- 
ogy of  Greece  in  the  heroic  age. 

In  the  following  pages  I  endeavor  to  give  to  the 
testimony  of  Homer  what  I  have  described  as  its  due 
place.  They  are  based  upon  a  wide  collection  of  par- 
ticulars from  the  text.  And,  as  far  as  possible,  I  have 
supplied  the  reader  with  means  of  judging  where  it  is 
Homer  that  speaks,  and  where  it  is  an  illustrative  tra- 
dition, or  an  indication  drawn  from  some  other  than  a 
literary  source ;  as  also  of  distinguishing  in  all  cases  ' 
between  evidence,  and  the  inference  or  conjecture 
which  I  may  have  presumed  to  found  upon  it. 

Upon  the  whole,  I  trust  enough  has  been  said  to  show 
that  in  the  text  of  the  Poet  we  may  find  solid  mate- 
rials to  work  upon  for  the  handling  of  the  Homeric 
question.  With  this  encouragement,  let  us  commence 
our  inquiries. 


CHAPTER  II. 


The  Three  Great  Appellatives. 

The  name  of  Greeks,  as  the  modern  equivalent  of 
the  several  appellatives  by  which  Homer  describes  the 
army  engaged  in  the  siege  of  Troy,  is  too  firmly  estab- 
lished to  be  changed.  But  it  is  not  a  correct  name. 
The  Greek  equivalent  of  the  word  is  rqaMoL  The 
name  rgala 1  is  found  in  the  Iliad,  but  it  is  only  a  local 
name  of  a  settlement  of  Boiotoi  or  Boeotians.  The 
name  applied  to  themselves  by  the  Greek  people 
throughout  the  historic  times,  as  at  the  present  day, 
was  not  Graikoi,  but  Hellenes.  And  even  this  name, 
as  Thucydides 2  observes,  had  not  come  into  vogue  in 
the  time  of  Homer.  It  was  indeed,  as  we  shall  find, 
creeping,  so  to  speak,  into  use :  but  the  standing  ap- 
pellations of  the  army  in  the  Iliad  are  these  three, 
Danaoi,  Argeioi,  and  Achaioi;  and  it  is  suffi- 
ciently plain  that  the  most  proper  national  name  for 
the  Greeks  of  the  period  was  that  of  'Aiaioi,  Achaians. 
We  call  them  Greeks  conventionally:  but  with  no 
more  accuracy  than  we  should  render  the  Galli  of 
Cassar  by  the  word  6  French.'    We  should  bear  in 


i  II.  ii.  498. 


2  i.  3. 


32 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


mind,  then,  that  in  strictness  the  Greeks  of  the  Troica 
were  Achaians. 

We  find  in  Homer  traces,  as  of  a  religion,  so  of  a 
race,  or  group  of  races,  who  inhabited  the  Greek  penin- 
sula before  the  Achaians,  or  any  other  tribe  of  the 
blood  afterwards  classed  as  Hellenic.  These  inhab- 
itants passed  in  different  places  under  a  variety  of 
designations ;  of  which  the  most  comprehensive  and 
wide-spread1  appears  to  have  been  Pelasgoi.  They 
seem  to  have  formed  the  base  of  the  Greek  army,  and 
of  the  people  subject  to  the  sway  of  Achaian  and  other 
great  families. 

There  is  no  trace  in  the  poems  of  their  having  used 
a  language  different  from  that  of  their  superiors  in 
station,  although  the  tradition  of  a  difference  in  blood 
subsisted  down  to  the  historic  time,  and  although  the 
Pelasgian  language,  where  the  people  using  it  had  not 
been  blended  with  the  Hellenes,  had  then  come  to  be 
accounted  as  a  distinct,  if  not  a  foreign,  tongue. 

The  relation  between  this  older  race  and  the  Hel- 
lenic tribes  leads  to  the  conclusion  that  both  were  alike 
derived  from  the  Aryan  stem.  And  there  is  no  reason 
to  believe  that  there  were  any  earlier  occupants  of  the 
Greek,  or  of  the  Italian  Peninsula,2  than  the  group 
of  tribes  that  was  called  Pelasgian.  Neither  of  these 
countries  presents  us  with  remains  belonging  to  what 
is  called  the  stone  period  of  the  human  race,  when  im- 
plements and  utensils  were  made  of  that  material,  and 
the  use  of  metals  was  unknown.  The  first  emigrants 
from  the  East  may  probably  have  worked  their  way  by 

1  Thirlwall,  Hist,  of  Greece,  vol.  i.  chap.  ii. 

2  Mommsen,  Hist,  of  Rome,  chap,  i. 


THE  THREE  GREAT  APPELLATIVES. 


33 


land  to  and  along  the  comparatively  level  and  easy 
countries  of  Central  Europe,  and  seem  not  to  have 
penetrated  through  the  masses  of  mountain,  which 
inclose  on  their  northern  sides  both  Greece  and  Italy. 
The  boast  of  autochthonism,  or  birth  from  the  soil,  so 
rife  in  the  historic  ages  of  Greece,  was  therefore  not 
irrational,  if  we  consider  it  to  betoken  only  the  claim 
to  first  occupancy.  And  it  seems  to  have  been  princi- 
pally in  vogue  among  the  people  of  Attica  and  Arcadia, 
the  former  of  which  had  long  been  impressed  with  a 
markedly  Pelasgian  character,  while  the  latter  retained 
that  character  even  through  the  historic  period.  The 
particulars  which  have  been  embraced  in  this  slight 
survey  are  partly  suggested  by,  and  are  in  all  cases 
accordant  with,  the  Homeric  testimony. 

The  Greeks  of  the  Iliad  are  ordinarily  called  by 
Homer 

1.  Danaoi. 

2.  Argeioi. 

3.  Achaioi.  , 

They  are  also  called 

1.  Panhellenes,  II.  ii.  530. 

2.  Panachaioi,  II.  ii.  404;  vii.  73,  159,  327 ;  ix.  301 ; 

x.  1;  xix.  193;  xxiii.  236.  Od.  i.  239;  xiv. 
369  ;  xxiv.  32. 
With  respect  to  the  three  first,  which  may  be  called 
the  Great  Appellatives  of  Homer,  it  is  manifest  that 
the  Poet  frequently  uses  them  as  interchangeable  and 
synonymous.  Yet,  upon  examination,  important  dis- 
tinctions will  be  found  to  exist  between  them. 

The  various  legends  interspersed  through  the  Poems 
carry  back  the  Homeric  tradition  to  a  period  several 
generations  earlier  than  the  War  of  Troy :  which  War, 

3 


34  JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 

together  with  the  attendant  group  of  circumstances,  I 
shall  commonly  call  the  T  r  o  i  c  a.  But  we  shall  find 
that  Homer  does  not  also  carry  backwards  the  use  of 
these  appellatives  indifferently  through  the  pre-Troic 
period  :  and  thus  we  shall  obtain  pretty  clear  evidence 
of  a  chronological  succession  among  them. 

This  rule  applies  likewise  to  other  Homeric  names. 
For  example ;  when  reference  is  made,  in  the  narra- 
tive of  the  Iliad,  to  the  soldiers  belonging  to  the  coun- 
try afterwards  called  Boeotia,  he  describes  them  as 
Boiotoi.  But  where  Agamemnon  and  Athene^  intro- 
duce the  legend 1  of  Tudeus,  which  touches  the  people 
of  the  same  district  at  a  prior  epoch,  they  are  called 
not  Boiotoi  but  Kadmeioi  and  Kadmeiones.  More- 
over, in  this  same  legend  appear  the  people  of  Argos 
and  the  people  of  Mycenae.  They  are  both  called 
Achaioi,  a  name  never  given  to  the  Kadmeioi. 

In  the  legend  of  the  birth  of  Eurustheus,2  the  scene 
is  laid  in  "Aqyog  'Axaimov.  This  name  we  shall  find 
still  attached  perhaps  to  the  Peloponnesos,  and  cer- 
tainly to  the  Eastern  Peloponnesos,  in  the  time  of 
Homer.  Its  inhabitants,  who  are  described,  as  we 
have  seen,  in  the  time  of  Tudeus,  that  is  to  say  one 
generation  before  the  War,  as  Achaioi,  are  called,  in 
the  time  of  Eurustheus,  and  therefore  before  the  period 
of  the  Pelopids,  not  Achaioi  but  Argeioi.3  It  seems 
impossible  to  treat  these  very  marked  usages  as  acci- 
dental. 

About  the  same  period  Proitos,  whom  the  post- 
Homeric  tradition  represents  as  a  brother  of  Eurus- 
theus, expelled  Bellerophon  from  Ephure.4    The  text, 


i  II.  iv.  385-398  ;  v.  800-807. 
3  II.  xix.  122,  124. 


2  II.  xix.  95  seqq. 
4  II.  vi.  158. 


THE  THREE  GREAT  APPELLATIVES. 


35 


true  to  itself,  describes  the  people  over  whom  Proitos 
ruled,  not  as  Danaoi  or  Achaioi,  but  as  Argeioi.  In 
the  same  manner  the  Poet  here  describes  as  Ephure 
what  in  the  Catalogue  he  calls  Corinth.1 

Homer  then  appears  to  point  to  Argeioi  as  the  more 
ancient,  and  Achaioi  as  the  more  recent,  name.  But, 
moreover,  he  uses  the  two  designations  with  marked 
respect  to  place  as  well  as  time. 

In  the  Eleventh  Iliad,2  Nestor  details  to  Patroclos 
the  legend  of  the  war  between  the  Pulians,  and  the 
Epeians  who  inhabited  Elis.  He  calls  the  Pulians  dis- 
tinctively Achaians,  where  he  is  speaking  of  them  as 
the  conquering  party.  He  seems  to  withhold  that 
name  from  the  conquered:  and  he  gives  it  to  the 
Pulians  at  a  period  which  must  have  been  within  the 
life  and  reign  of  Eurustheus,  that  is  to  say,  the  period 
when  the  name  of  Argeians  was  attached  to  those  who 
inhabited  the  ruling  quarter  of  Greece,  or  the  Eastern 
Peloponnesos. 

But  the  word  Argeioi,  used  freely  by  Homer  as  a 
national  designation,  has  also  a  marked  local  sense  in 
the  poems.  It  is  a  standing  epithet,  in  the  singular, 
of  Helen,  and  this  too  in  the  mouth  of  Greeks,  and  of 
deities,  whose  use  of  it  gives  it  a  force  quite  different 
from  that  which  it  might  have  had  among  the  Trojans. 
The  purely  national  name  would  in  such  a  case  have 
been  void  of  distinctive  meaning;  but  now  we  natu- 
rally interpret  the  epithet  as  referring  to  the  part  of 
Greece  with  which  Helen  was  especially  connected. 
According  to  the  post-Homeric  tradition,  confirmed  by 
the  Iliad,  which  makes  Lacedsemon  the  country  of 


i  II.  ii.  570. 


2  II.  xi.  670-761. 


36 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


Castor  and  Poludeukes,1  Tundareos,  her  father,  was 
king  of  Sparta.  Till  the  Pelopid  House  acquired  it, 
and  thus  the  Achaian  sway  began,  this  would  be  an 
Argeian  kingdom;  and  thus  Helen,  though  the  wife 
of  Menelaos,  represents  by  her  descent  an  Argeian 
title  to  it,  so  that  the  epithet  thus  acquires  a  full  sig- 
nificance. 

Thus  far  I  have  cited  some  examples  to  illustrate  the 
practice  of  Homer.  Let  us  now  consider  the  leading 
particulars  connected  with  the  use  of  the  three  Great 
Appellatives. 

The  name  Danaoi  is  used  in  the  Iliad  147  times: 
in  the  Odyssey  thirteen.  Once  it  is  combined  with 
Argeioi,  in  Od.  viii.  578,  and  appears  to  serve  as  an 
epithet.  It  is  never  used  in  the  feminine.  It  is  never 
used  in  the  singular ;  and  never  locally. .  It  seems 
never  to  signify  the  people  inhabiting  the  Greek  pen- 
insula and  islands,  nor  their  ancestors  in  prior  his- 
tory :  but  invariably  and  only  the  Greeks  of  the  army. 
It  has  therefore  all  the  appearance  of  being  an  heroic 
and  poetical  rather  than  an  historical  appellation,  and 
thus  it  is  well  adapted  to  describe  men  engaged  in  a 
military  expedition  surrounded  with  the  most  romantic 
associations. 

Accordingly,  the  epithets  applied  to  Javaol  are  ex- 
clusively of  a  military  character.    They  are 

1.  ijgwsg,  II.  ii.  110,  256  ;  xv.  733  (heroes). 

2.  6eQa7tovreg  "Aqi]Os,  II.  vii.  382  ;  xix.  78  (comrades  of 

Ares). 

3.  cpiloTtr6l8[j,oi,  II.  xx.  351  (war-loving). 

4.  aiyjMjzai,  II.  xii.  419  (spearmen). 

5.  damatai,  II.  xiii.  680  (shielded,  heavy -armed). 

i  II.  iii.  244. 


THE  THREE  GREAT  APPELLATIVES. 


37 


6.  iqdifioi,  II.  xi.  290  (stalwart). 

7.  Ta%v7tcoXoi,  II.  viii.  161  (of  swift  steeds). 

It  being  then  plain  that  Dan  aoi  was  not  the  proper 
contemporary  name  of  the  Greeks,  it  is  also  plain  that 
it  could  not  have  been  applied  to  the  Greeks  as  an 
army  before  Troy,  unless  it  had  had  some  root  lying 
deep  in  the  history  or  legends  of  Greece. 

National  or  tribal  names  in  Homer  usually  come 

1.  From  an  eponymist  or  founder  of  a  state,  directly 
as  Dardanoi  or  Troes,  or  Kadmeioi;  or  indi- 
rectly, when  they  proceed  from  the  name  of  a  country, 
which  name  has  been  acquired  from  an  eponymist. 
Such  is  Ithakesioi  from  Ithake,  Ithak£  itself  being 
derived  from  Ithakos,  who  is  mentioned  in  Od. 
xvii.  207. 

2.  In  like  manner  a  name  may  come  mediately  from 
a  race  instead  of  an  individual.  Thus  it  seems  that 
H  e  1 1  a  s  is  derived  from  H  e  1 1  o  i ,  and  is  in  its  turn  the 
source  of  the  great  national  name  Hell  en. 

3.  From  the  physical  character  of  the  country  in- 
habited, as  Threkes  (Thracians),  from  Oqt^,  describ- 
ing a  rough  highland  country:1  or  Aigialeis,  from 
Aiyialog,  the  district  of  coast  to  the  south  of  the  Gulf 
of  Corinth. 

4.  In  the  single  case  of  the  Athenians,  we  find  the 
name  of  a  population  derived  from  that  of  a  deity. 

Besides  the  Homeric  names  which  can  be  traced  to 
one  or  other  of  these  sources,  there  are  names  of  which 
the  connection  with  any  of  them  is  not  established,  or 
even  where  it  is  improbable. 

The  text  of  Homer  affords  very  slender  aid  for 


i  Cf.  Od.  ix.  27.. 


38 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


tracing  the  name  Danaoi  up  to  its  source.  But  we 
must  combine  the  fact  of  its  application,  limited  as  it 
is,  to  the  nation,  with  the  negative  evidence  afforded 
by  this  fact,  that  Homer  nowhere  uses  the  name  as  a 
domestic  name,  either  for  his  own  or  for  the  immedi- 
ately preceding  generations.  This  seems  to  throw 
back  the  origin  of  the  name  to  a  period  comparatively 
remote. 

And  when  we  reach  such  a  period,  we  find  at  least 
a  clue.  In  II.  xiv.  319  we  hear  of  the  amour  of  Zeus 
with  a  beautiful  Danae,  of  the  royal  house  of  Acrisios, 
from  which  union  sprang  Perseus  and  his  line.  The 
presumption  then  arises,  that  this  Danae,  being  the 
daughter  and  mother  of  princes,  was  of  the  lineage  of 
a  Danaos,  that  this  Danaos  was  himself  a  real  or  re- 
puted prince  of  celebrity,  and  that  he  gave  his  name 
to  the  people  with  whom,  and  among  whom,  he  effected 
a  settlement  in  Greece. 

This  may  be  the  proper  place  to  observe  that,  on  the 
subject  of  the  foreign  origin  of  Greek  races  or  houses, 
Homer  is  what  is  termed  an  unwilling  witness.  In- 
tensely national  in  feeling,  he  represents  the  first  form 
of  that  peculiar  sentiment  which,  in  the  historic  period, 
divided  mankind  into  Greeks  and  Barbarians ;  much 
as  the  Hebrew  race,  upon  grounds  of  a  more  definite 
character,  made  their  division  of  the  world  into  Jew 
and  Gentile.  There  can  be  little  doubt  that  Homer 
could,  if  he  would,  have  told  us  much  respecting  im- 
migrations and  settlements  in  Greece,  which  now  re- 
mains the  subject  of  comparatively  dark  conjecture. 
But  it  may  be  broadly  laid  down  that  he  systematically 
eschews  tracing  either  a  family  or  a  tribe  to  an  origin 
abroad.    It  seems  to-be  his  intention  that  we  should 


THE  THREE  GREAT  APPELLATIVES.  39 


assume  all  Greek  families  and  races,  and  further  all 
Greek  manners  and  institutions,  to  have  sprung  out 
of  the  soil.  The  sources  of  silver  and  copper  and 
some  other  commodities,  and  moreover  of  works  of 
art,  he  is  willing,  or  even  careful,  to  point  out.  But 
not  so  as  to  man  and  his  highest  operations.  Though 
he  tells  us  sometimes  of  foreign  persons  and  events, 
he  never,  I  think,  consciously  supplies,  but  seems  hab- 
itually to  keep  back,  the  link  between  them  and  his 
own  beloved  Greek  nation. 

All  this  seems  to  be  comformable  to  the  course  of 
natural  feeling.  Arrivals  from  abroad,  in  the  earliest 
periods  of  the  life  of  a  nation,  usually  indicate  either 
the  conquest,  or  at  least  the  superiority,  in  one  form 
or  another,  of  foreigners  over  natives,  of  what  is  strange 
to  the  soil  over  what  is  associated  with  it.  In  this 
there  is  some  violation  of  that  feeling  of  simple  rever- 
ence for  the  past,  which  is  so  conspicuous  among  the 
Greeks  of  Homer,  and  which  is  jarred  by  the  memory 
of  all  disturbances  of  its  even  tenor.  It  can  hardly 
be  that,  in  any  country,  such  narratives  should  be 
popular  at  or  near  the  time  of  the  events.  Even  the 
process  by  which  Hellenes  mastered  Pelasgians,  or  by 
which  Pelopids  put  themselves  in  the  place  of  Perseids, 
is  nowhere  disclosed  to  us  by  Homer :  whose  purpose 
it  was  to  unite  more  closely  the  elements  of  the 
nation,  and  not  to  record  that  they  had  once  been 
separate. 

When  Homer  tells  us  of  descendants  of  a  Tantalos, 
or  an  Aiolos,  and  of  a  people  called  Kadmeiones,  but 
gives  us  no  clue  to  the  extraction,  or  to  the  habitation, 
of  any  of  these  personages  themselves,  we  may  conclude, 
without  much  risk  of  error,  that  none  of  them  were 


40 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


native  Greeks,  and  that  their  names  mark  the  point  of 
transition  from  a  foreign  to  a  Greek  domicile  for 
their  respective  families.  He  never  even  names  the 
connection  of  Kadmeiones  with  Kadmos,  or  of  Pelo- 
pidai  with  Pelops  ;  both  these  great  personages  are 
only  named  by  him  incidentally,  in  remote  portions  of 
the  Poems ;  and  as  to  Aiolos,  the  ancestor  of  the 
Aiolids,  it  has  not  yet  been  generally  recognized  that 
the  Poet  names  him  at  all. 

Without,  then,  calling  in  the  aid  of  extraneous  tra- 
ditions, it  appears  highly  probable  that  the  Danaoi 
bore  the  same  relation  to  a  Danaos,  as  the  Kadmeioi 
obviously  bear  to  a  real  or  imaginary  Kadmos. 

It  is  also  probable,  that  Danae"  stands  in  the  genera- 
tion next  to  Danaos.  For  Danae  herself  stands,  as 
we  shall  see,  in  the  sixth  generation  before  the  T  r  o  i  c  a ; 
and  the  knowledge  and  traditions  of  Homer  nowhere 
go  back  beyond  the  seventh  generation.  But  as  Danae 
is  the  daughter  of  Acrisios,  not  of  Danaos,  it  is  proba- 
ble that  Acrisios  was  a  younger  brother  of  Danaos ; 
and  that  the  genealogy  stands  as  follows : 

1.  Danaos  =  Acrisios. 

2.  Danae. 

3.  Perseus. 

4.  Sthenelos. 

5.  Eurustheus.    Contemporary  with  Heracles  and  Pelops. 

6.  Atreus  =  Thuestes. 

7.  Agamemnon  =  Aigisthos. 

It  will  here  be  perceived  that  the  text  of  Homer  is 
altogether  at  variance  with  those  later  legends,  which 
throw  back  the  first  Greek  dynasties  into  a  very  remote 
comparative  antiquity.  There  is,  I  apprehend,  an  in- 
trinsic improbability  in  such  legends  as  affect  to  trace 
prolonged  lines  of  sovereigns  through  ages  of  darkness 


THE  THREE  GREAT  APPELLATIVES. 


41 


and  barbarism,  not  possessed  of  the  ordinary  means 
of  record ;  but  there  is  also  this  strong  presumption 
in  favor  of  the  Homeric  text,  that  his  genealogies, 
gathered  indiscriminately  as  they  are  from  different 
parts  of  the  Poems,  are  in  singular,  if  not  absolutely 
unvarying,  accordance  with  each  other. 

According  to  the  post-Homeric  tradition,  Danaos 
was  an  Egyptian,  and  was  brother  of  Aiguptos.  He 
migrated  into  Greece,  and  became  king  of  Argos. 
Proitos  was  his  great-grandson ;  and  as,  according  to 
the  legend  of  the  Sixth  Iliad,1  Proitos  stands  at  two 
or  two  and  a-half  generations  before  the  war,  there  is 
here  an  apparent  agreement  with  Homer ;  but  as 
Acrisios  also  is  made  the  brother  of  Proitos,  a  much 
greater  antiquity  is  in  effect  claimed  for  the  immigra- 
tion of  Danaos.  So  far,  however,  as  respects  his 
personality,  the  seat  of  his  kingdom,  and  his  being  of 
foreign  origin,  'the  later  tradition  sustains  the  pre- 
sumptions arising  from  the  text  of  Homer. 

The  early  disappearance  of  the  name  from  the  roll 
of  tradition  would  be  easily  accounted  for  by  that 
change  of  the  dynasty  in  the  male  line  which  takes 
place  at  the  time  of  Danae\ 

From  what  country  Danaos  came,  we  shall  hereafter 
have  occasion  to  consider.  For  the  present  we  may 
take  him  to  have  been  one  of  the  personages  who 
arrived  in  Greece  as  a  stranger,  and  who  there  founded 
such  a  dynasty,  among  the  primitive  or  Pelasgian 
population,  as  became  naturalized.  This  foundation 
seems  to  have  taken  place  at  the  very  commencement 
of  what  we  may  call  the  traditionary,  as  opposed  to  the 


l  II.  vi.  158. 


42 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


merely  mythical,'  period,  about  two  hundred  years 
before  the  Trojan  War. 

Even  this  is  considerably  older  than  the  date  of  any 
family  which  we  can  connect  with  the  Achaian  name, 
or  with  the  Hellenic  stock.  It  seems,  however,  quite 
possible  that  Perseus  and  his  race  may  on  the  father's 
side  have  descended  from  an  Hellenic  ancestry,  and 
that  the  fable  of  Zeus  and  Danae  may  be  no  more  than 
a  veil  -employed  to  cover  the  transition,  and  to  dignify 
the  origin  of  the  incoming  family. 

Hesiod1  terms  Perseus  both  Dana'ides,  and  son  of 
Danae  and  states  that  Danaos  relieved  Argos  from 
drought.  JEschylus  in  the  Supplices 2  represents  the 
whole  Greek  Peninsula  as  having  been  originally  sub- 
ject to  one  and  the  same  sway  under  Pelasgos.  Euri- 
pides3 says  that  Danaos  changed  the  name  of  the 
Peloponnesians  from  Pelasgiotai  to  Danaoi.  These  re- 
ports are  in  no  way  at  variance  with  the  Homeric 
text. 

Upon  the  whole,  then,  the  probable  conclusions  are : 

1.  That  the  Danaan  name  was  dynastic. 

2.  That  the  dynasty  was  pre- Hellenic. 

3.  That  it  stands  next  in  chronological  succession 
to  the  Pelasgic  time ;  and 

4.  That  it  makes  its  appearance  at  about  two  cen- 
turies, more  or  less,  before  the  War  of  Troy. 

We  have  next  to  deal  with  the  name  Argeioi. 
And  first  as  to  the  facts  connected  with  its  use  in*  the 
Poems. 

It  is  found  177  times  in  the  Iliad,  and  seventeen 


i  Fragm.  58,  and  Scut.  Here.  216,  229.  2  v.  262. 

3  Ar.  Fr.  ii.  7. 


THE  THREE  GREAT  APPELLATIVES. 


43 


times  in  the  Odyssey.  I  speak  of  the  plural  form. 
The  singular  is  also  used  eleven  times  in  the  Iliad, 
and  seventeen  times  in  the  Odyssey. 

Of  the  seventeen  passages  in  the  Odyssey,  not  one 
refers  to  the  Greeks  as  a  nation,  or  as  contemporary 
with  the  action  of  the  Poem.  In  two  of  them,  Od.  iii. 
309  and  xv.  240,  the  word  signifies  the  inhabitants  of 
Argolis  or  the  North-Eastern  Peloponnesos.  In  the 
other  fifteen,  it  is  always  applied  to  the  Greek  army 
before  Troy. 

In  the  Iliad,  we  have  certain  cases  of  the  local  use. 
Proitos,1  who  was  nearly  contemporary  with  Eurus- 
theus,  ruled  over  Argeians.  From  the  text  it  would 
seem  as  if  he  were  a  neighbor  to  Sisuphos,  of  Ephure 
or  Corinth  :  and  if  so,  his  subjects  may  have  been  Ar- 
gives  of  Argolis,  taken  largely ;  of  the  Eastern,  or 
Eastern  and  Northern,  Peloponnesos.  Such  is  evi- 
dently the  meaning  of  Argeioi  in  the  legend  of 
the  birth  of  Eurustheus.2  On  the  other  hand,  the 
name  of  Proitos  was  attached  to  one  of  the  Gates  of 
Thebes.  It  was  plainly  therefore  a  Phoenician  name. 
It  is  far  from  clear  that  he  reigned  in  Thebes  ;  but,  if 
he  did  so,  then  the  name  Argeioi  is  applicable  to  the 
inhabitants  of  Boeotia.  This  slender  probability  is 
the  only  presumption  afforded  us  of  the  use  of  the 
name  Argeioi  beyond  the  limits  of  the  Perseid  or 
Pelopid  dominions  in  Peloponnesos,  except  as  a  desig- 
nation for  the  army  before  Troy.  Again,  in  the  cha- 
riot race  of  the  Twenty-third  Iliad,  Diomed  is  described 
as  iEtolian  by  birth,  but  as  ruling  among  Argeioi.3 
These,  it  seems  plain,  must  be  the  Argives  of  Argos, 


i  D.  vi.  159.  2  ii.  Xix.  122. 

3  II.  xxiii.  471. 


44 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


who  formed  his  contingent.  Still,  upon  this  local 
name  there  had  supervened,  since  the  accession  of  the 
Pelopid  dynasty,  as  we  shall  find  from  the  legend  of 
Tudeus,  the  paramount  and  wider  name  of  Achaioi.1 

The  name  of  Argeioi,  then,  appears  to  stand  par- 
tially in  the  same  category  with  Danaoi,  as  a  name 
rather  poetic  and  archaic,  than  actually  current ;  and 
as  one  of  which  the  common  application  to  the  Greeks 
in  general,  at  any  period,  is  uncertain  ;  but  which  had, 
several  generations  before,  been  the  proper  designation 
at  least  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  ruling  portion  of  the 
peninsula. 

This  name  is,  on  the  other  hand,  so  far  unlike  the 
Danaan  name,  that  we  find  it  in  the  singular  number 
and  the  feminine  gender.  But  it  is  only  thus  applied 
to  two  persons  ;  Helen,  and  the  goddess  Here.  It  is 
plain,  as  we  have  seen,  that,  for  the  former,  it  means 
not  Greek  Helen,  but  Argive  Helen.  It  is  but  twice 
given  to  Here  :  both  times  where  she  is  acting  with 
Athene  in  the  fourth  and  fifth  Iliad  ; 2  in  the  first  pas- 
sage Zeus  cites  them  as  helpers  of  Menelaos,  in  the  sec- 
ond, as  having  restrained  and  baffled  Ar£s  on  the  field. 
The  meaning  of  Argei^,  when  applied  to  a  goddess, 
according  to  analogy,  must  be,  4  worshipped  in  Argos,' 
as  Aphrodite  is  called  Kuthereia,  and  Apollo  Smintheus. 
The  local  worship  of  Here  continued,  as  is  well  known, 
to  characterize  Argos  throughout  the  historic  period. 
It  was  to  this  local  point  in  particular  that  her  tena- 
cious attachment  was  constantly  directed.  It  survived 
dynastic  changes  ;  watched  over  Eurustheus  ;  reap- 
peared in  hatred  of  Heracles  ;  and  protected  Agamem- 

i  II.  iv.  384 ;  v.  803.  2  n.  iv.  8 ;  v.  908. 


THE  THREE  GREAT  APPELLATIVES.  45 

non.  Three  cities,  we  know,  she  loved  beyond  all 
others  : 1  Mycenae,  Argos,  and  Sparta ;  and  her  at- 
tachment to  the  Greeks  in  the  War  possibly  may  have 
its  root  in  this  more  special  and  local  affection ;  or 
may,  on  the  other  hand,  be  due  to  the  representative 
character  of  that  district  as  the  political  centre  of  the 
whole  of  Greece. 

If  in  one  point  of  view,  as  has  been  suggested,  the 
use  of  the  Argeian  name  by  Homer  was  poetic  and 
archaic,  on  the  other  hand,  we  may  compare  this 
employment  of  the  designation  of  the  ruling  part  to 
signify  the  whole  with  t^ie  cases  of  more  extended  em- 
pires. All  the  races,  that  served  under  Xerxes  and 
Darius  in  their  expeditions  against  Greece,  were  re- 
garded as  Persians.  The  Roman  name  was  applicable 
to  the  people  of  Campania  or  Calabria,  as  forming 
parts  of  the  Roman  dominion ;  while  in  any  domestic 
or  Italian  matter  their  local  name  would  naturally 
revive.  So  it  may  be  that,  while  all  the  Greeks  of 
Homer  are  Argeians  on  the  field  of  Troas,  a  portion  of 
them  may  also  be  Argeians  in  the  local  sense  after- 
wards given  to  Argives  ;  with  regard,  like  Kadmeians, 
iEtolians,  Arcadians,  or  Locrians,  to  their  own  local 
habitation. 

We  have  thus  traced  back  this,  the  second  of  the 
Great  Appellatives  for  the  Greek  army,  to  a  more  an- 
cient and  also  more  limited  use  for  the  inhabitants  of 
the  ruling  part  of  Greece  ;  but  we  have  still  to  ask, 
how  came  it  originally  to  be  so  applied  in  either  way, 
and  what  is  the  root  and  meaning  of  the  name  ? 

Plainly  its  root  is  that  of  the  word  Argos;  and 


i  II.  iv.  51. 


46 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


plainly  also,  as  we  shall  find,  the  application  of  the 
territorial  name  Argos  is  wider  than  that  of  its  deriva- 
tive. 

There  are  several  forms  of  geographical  expression 
under  which  Homer  appears  to  signify  the  entire  ter- 
ritory inhabited  by  Greek  races,  or  subject  to  Greek 
sway. 

(&)  The  only  word  which  manifestly,  without  addi- 
tion of  any  kind,  suffices  with  the  Poet  for  this  purpose 
is  Achaiis.  It  is  used  either  substantively,  or  adjec- 
tively  with  ycua  or  ala,  in  eight  passages.  It  will  suf- 
fice to  quote  one  in  which  Nestqr  describes  the  gathering 
of  the  army,  a  process  that  manifestly  included  the 
whole  dominion : 

"Xabv  ayeipovreg  kclt'  'Axatda  TcovXvjBoTeipav.1 

In  a  line  twice  used,  indeed,  it  is  combined  with 
Argos : 

"Apyog  eg  imroporov  ml  'AxaClSa  mTdnyvvaiKa? 

But  there  is  no  reason  why  in  this  line  the  word  should 
not  follow  what  we  have  seen  to  be  the  ruling  sense, 
Argos  meaning  the  more  famous  part,  and  Achaiis 
meaning  the  whole. 

(6)  A  second  and  compound  form  of  expression, 
evidently  conveying,  as  a  compound,  the  same  sense, 
is  found  in  the  combination  of  Argos  with  Hellas  : 

avdpbg,  rov  Kkeog  evpv  md'  '!£>X?id6a  ml  fxeaov  "Apyog.3 

The  meaning  of  the  line  plainly  is,  a  reputation  reach- 

1  II.  xi.  770.  1  Collecting  an  army  through  fertile  Achaiis/  Cf.  II. 
i.  254 ;  vii.  124. 

2  '  Horse-feeding  Argos  and  Achaiis  with  beautiful  women/ 

3  Od.  i.  344.  '  Whose  fame  extends  through  Hellas  and  mid- 
Argos.' 


THE  THREE  GREAT  APPELLATIVES. 


47 


ing  over  all  Greece.  It  is  not  conceivable  that  Pen- 
elope, who  uses  the  phrase  more  than  once,  could  mean 
to  assign  to  her  husband's  fame  a  limit  narrower  than 
the  Greek  nationality.  But  we  shall  find  that  the 
name  Hellas  evidently  has  a  special  affinity  with  the 
north  of  Greece.  Presumably,  then,  this  line  may 
mean, 

'Through  Northern  and  through  Southern  Greece/  * 

(<?)  But  we  find  also  a  third  form  of  expression,  in 
which  the  word  Argos,  with  the  affix  nav,  appears  to 
cover  the  whole,  at  least,  of  continental  Greece,  and 
thus  to  be  equivalent,  or  nearly  so,  to  Achaiis,  and  also 
to  Hellas  combined  with  Argos  t 

TcoKkyuiv  vqooiCL  Kal  "Apye'i  iravri  avacceiv.1 

For  this  line,  joining  Argos  with  the  islands,  describes 
the  range  of  the  whole  empire,  or  (to  use  a  modern 
phrase)  suzerainty,  of  Agamemnon. 

(d)  Next  it  appears  that  we  have  the  word  Argos, 
with  particular  ethnical  or  tribal  affixes,  used  distribu- 
tively  for  each  of  the  chief  parts  of  Greece. 

In  the  Catalogue,  after  Homer  has  enumerated  all 
the  contingents  drawn  from  the  Islands,  as  well  as 
from  Southern  and  Middle  Greece,  he  opens  a  new 
division  with  the  line  : 

Nw  av  Tovg  'ogool  to  UeTtaayiKov  "Apyog  ivacov.1 

And  he  then  proceeds  to  reckon  nine  contingents,  all 
of  which  were  drawn  from  Greece  north  of  Mount 
Othrus,  or,  in  other  words,  from  Thessaly. 

1  II.  ii.  108.    (  To  rule  over  many  islands  and  all  Argos/ 

2  II.  ii.  681.  '  But  now  (recount)  those,  as  many  as  inhabited  Pe- 
lasgian  Argos/ 


V 


48  JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 

It  appears,  then,  that  by  Pelasgic  Argos  Homer 
meant  Thessaly. 

(e)  Next  we  have  an  Achaiie  Argos  mentioned  in 
five  passages. 

In  the  first1  (of  which  the  words  are  repeated  in 
the  second),  Agamemnon  is  speaking  of  the  return  to 
Greece.  While  the  phrase  therefore  might  carry  the 
sense  of  that  country  at  large,  it  may  also  very  prop- 
erly mean  the  seat  of  the  Pelopid  power,  or  the  Eastern 
Peloponnesos. 

In  the  third,  Here  goes  to  Achaiie  Argos2  to  hasten 
the  birth  of  Eurustheus.  The  meaning  appears  to  be 
that  she  went  to  the  kingdom  of  Sthenelos  his  father, 
which  again  will  mean  the  Eastern  Peloponnesos. 

In  the  fourth,  Telemachos  asks  where  was  Menelaos 
whilst  Aigisthos  was  engaged  in  the  work  of  treachery 
and  murder.  6  Was  he  away  from  Achaiie  Argos,  and 
travelling  abroad  ? ' 3  Here,  while  Sparta  only  might 
(as  far  as  the  meaning  goes)  be  signified,  the  sense  of 
'  Eastern  Peloponnesos,'  or  the  6  Pelopid  dominion,'  is 
perfectly  suitable,  and  appears  to  be  the  true  sense  of 
the  phrase. 

(/)  Further  we  find  an  lason  Argos.  Eurumachos, 
the  suitor,  pays  a  compliment  to  the  beauty  of  Pene- 
lope by  saying,  6  You  would  have  more  suitors  than 
you  now  have,'  i.e.  than  these  islands  yield  you : 

el  ttcivtec  ae  ISoiev  av'  "laaov  "kpyog  'kxaioiA 

He  evidently  goes  beyond  the  dominions  of  Odysseus. 
But  then  he  probably  speaks  only  of  the  territory  lying 
nearest  to  them,  and  in  habitual  intercourse  with  them. 

i  II.  ix.  141,  283.  2  ii.  Xix.  us.  3  Od.  iii.  249. 

4  '  If  all  the  Achaians  of  Iasian  Argos  could  see  you.'  Od.  xviii. 
246. 


THE  THREE  GREAT  APPELLATIVES.  49 


Now  this  was  Western  Pelopoimesos :  as  we  know 
from  the  limited  range  of  Greek  navigation ;  from  the 
direct  testimony  of  the  Poems,  which  tell  us  of  the 
journey  of  Odysseus  to  Ephure,1  and  of  the  debt  which 
Odysseus  went  to  Messene 2  to  recover ;  and  (not  to 
mention  other  circumstances)  from  the  apprehension 
of  the  Suitors  that  Telemachos  would  at  once  repair  to 
Elis,  or  to  Pulos,3  for  aid.  In  the  same  manner  the 
relations  of  Crete  were  with  Eastern  Peloponnesos; 
and  therefore  Helen  at  Troy  easily  recognizes  Idome- 
neus,  because,  as  she  says,  she  has  often  seen  him  in 
Sparta.4  So  far,  then,  Iasian  Argos  would  seem  to 
consist  of  Western  Peloponnesos,  including  therein  the 
dominions  of  Elis,  Pulos,  and  perhaps  parts  at  least  of 
Messene\ 

We  have  other  means  of  connecting  the  name  of 
Iasos  with  Western  Peloponnesos.  For  Amphion,  the. 
king  of  the  Minue'ian  Orchomenos,  was  the  son  of 
Iasos.  He  was  also  the  father  of  Chloris,  whom 
Neleus  married,  and  who  became  queen  of  Pulos. 
Now  there  was  a  river  Minueios 5  between  Pulos  and 
Elis  ;  and  not  only  is  there  an  Orchomenos  included  in 
the  places  which  supplied  the  Arcadian  contingent,6  but 
also  Agamemnon  asks  of  Odysseus,  in  Hades,  whether 
his  son  Orestes  is  at  Orchomenos,  or  at  Pulos,  or  at 
Sparta ; 7  as  if  it  were  some  considerable  seat  of  power 
where  a  prince  might  find  refuge.  Thus  Amphion, 
the  son  of  Iasos,  is  placed  in  close  connection  both 
with  Bceotia  and  with  Western  Peloponnesos. 

Further,  Homer  acquaints  us  that  he  and  his  brother 


i  Od.  i.  260. 
3  Od.  xxiv.  431. 
5  H.  xi.  722. 


6  II.  ii.  605. 
4 


2  Od.  xxi.  15. 
4  II.  iii.  232. 
?  Od.  xi.  459. 


50 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


Zetlios  first  founded  and  fortified  Thebes ;  for,  says  the 
Poet,  not  even  they  could  hold  it  unfortified.1  As  his 
daughter  married  Neleus,  this  fortification  must  have 
been  effected  from  four  to  five  generations  before  the 
Troica.  But  he  founded  no  dynasty  in  Thebes.  On 
the  contrary,  we  find  from  Homer  that  (Edipus  ruled 
there,  apparently  in  succession  to  his  father,  two  gen- 
erations before  the  War.2  And,  according  to  tradition, 
he  was  the  descendant  of  Kadmos,  who  had  colonized 
Thebes  from  Phoenicia.  It  seems  very  possible  that 
Amphion,  like  so  many  others,3  was  expelled  from  the 
fat  soil  of  Boeotia  ;  that  he  passed  into  Western  Pelo- 
ponnesos ;  and  that  he  carried  thither  both  the  names 
of  Orchemenos  and  Minue'ios,  which  we  find  undeniably 
existing  in  that  region,  and  the  name  Iasos,  which  thus 
receives  a  probable  and  natural  application. 

Iasian  Argos  then  is  the  Western  Peloponnesos. 

.And  thus  moreover  we  find  Argos,  with  adjuncts, 
running  over  the  three  most  famous  portions  of  Greece. 
It  is  the  common  term  in  three  distinct  territorial 
names,  as  if  it  meant £  a  settlement,'  and  as  if  they  re- 
spectively signified 

1.  Thessaly,  the  settlement  named  from  the  Pelas- 
goi. 

2.  Eastern  Peloponnesos,  the  settlement  named 
from  the  Achaioi. 

3.  Western  Peloponnesos,  the  settlement  named 
from  Iasos. 

(#)  Further,  it  is  incontestable  that  Argos  some- 
times means  the  city  known  in  history  by  that  name,  or 
rather  that  city  with  its  immediately  contiguous  terri- 


1  Od.  xi.  264. 


2  Od.  xi.  273-276. 


3  Thuc.  i.  2. 


THE  THREE  GREAT  APPELLATIVES. 


51 


tory  :  for  example,  in  the  Catalogue,1  where  it  is  men- 
tioned with  Tiruns  and  other  places,  as  making  up  the 
contingent  of  Diomed  ;  and  where  it  is  named  with 
Mycenae  and  Sparta  as  being  together  the  favorite 
cities  of  Here  Qrol^eg').  The  word  polis  does  not 
indeed  invariably  include  a  district ;  for  in  certain 
cases  we  find  it  used  for  the  town,  in  opposition  to 
agros,  the  country.2  But  this  seems  to  be  the  only 
case  where  the  word  is  applied  to  Argos.  We  have  a 
similar  use,  when,  as  Telemachos  is  quitting  Sparta, 
he  is  joined  by  Theoclumenos, 4  a  fugitive  from  Argos.' 3 

On  the  other  hand,  the  signification,  though  still 
local,  must  be  enlarged  where  Agamemnon  says  that 
Briseis  shall  pass  her  life  at  his  palace  '  in  Argos,' 4 
since  the  city  of  Argos  was  under  the  sway  of  Diomed, 
and  the  residence  of  Agamemnon  was  at  Mycenae. 
The  same  will  hold  good  of  the  passage  in  which 
Ephure,  afterwards  Corinth,  is  described  as  situate  in  a 
nook  of  horse-feeding  Argos,  iiviw"AQyzog  Inno^oxoio^ 

The  epithet  '  horse-feeding  '  has  the  effect  of  showing 
that  the  country  designated  is  a  plain  country.  Thus 
the  island  of  Ithaca  is  described  as  a  goat-feeding 6 
spot,  and  more  beautiful  than  a  horse-feeding  district. 
Of  course  the  phrase  is  to  be  understood  by  com- 
parison. 

(5)  Lastly,  there  are  one  or  two  passages  in  which 
the  name  Argos  may  be  held  to  stand  alone  for  Greece 
at  large  :  as  when  Nestor  declares  it  shameful  for  the 
army  to  return  to  Argos  <^Aq)>o6§z  UvaU~)  before  the 
mind  of  Zeus  is  known.    And  Poludamas,  speaking 


1  II.  ii.  559. 
3  Ocl.  xv.  224. 
6  Od.  iv.  606. 


*  II.  xxiii.  832,  835 ;  Od.  xvii.  182. 
4  II.  i.  80.  5  ii.  Vi.  152. 

7  II.  ii.  348. 


52 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


of  the  possible  destruction  of  the  Greek  army  in  Troas, 
thus  describes  that  contingency : 

vovvfivovg  unoliioOai  art  "Apyeog  kvdad'  'Axaiovg.1 

Paris,  too,  says  he  brought  home  property  from  Argos. 
This  may  mean  from  Sparta  as  part  of  the  Pelopid 
dominion  ;  or  it  may  mean  from  Greece  at  large.  But 
perhaps  we  cannot  be  sure  that  in  these  passages  Argos 
stands  for  more  than  a  description  of  the  whole  by  its 
capital  part. 

Argos,  then,  with  Homer  has  these  four  uses  : 

1.  It  may  be  held  to  mean,  alone  or  with  nav,  Greece 
at  large  ;  but,  if  so,  it  is  rarely  thus  used. 

2.  It  may  mean  the  Pelopid  dominions,  or,  taken 
roughly,  the  Eastern  Peloponnesos. 

3.  It  may  mean  the  city  of  Argos,  with  the  imme- 
diately surrounding  district  attached  to  it.  In  this 
sense  it  accepts  the  epithet  Ttolvdlwiov :  and  the  epithets 
MTtoftorov,  Ttolmvqov,  and  ovdotQ  doovQfjg,  appear  to  apply 
to  it  both  in  this  and  in  the  lastrnamed  sense. 

4.  When  joined  with  distinctive  epithets  of  an  his- 
torical, not  a  physical,  character,  it  seems  to  be  ap- 
plicable to  most  portions  of  Greek  territory,  as  if  a 
radical  signification,  such  as  settlement,  or  colony  in 
the  original  sense  of  the  word,  still  adhered  to  it. 

When  we  proceed  to  examine  the  etymology  of  the 
word,  we  find  that,  as  it  is  but  once  combined  with 
polis,  so  the  epithets  attaching  to  it  (as  above),  all  of 
them  indicate  a  tract  of  country ;  like  6  land '  among 
the  Scotch,  as  in  the  expression  6  landward  parishes.' 
And  again,  on  comparing  it  with  agros,  the  proper 

1  II.  xii.  70.  '  That  the  Achaians  perish  inglorious  away  from 
Argos.' 


THE  THREE  GREAT  APPELLATIVES. 


53 


term  for  describing  a  rural  tract,  this  latter  appears  to 
be  the  very  same  word  with  the  middle  consonants 
transposed.    So  far,  then,  the  meaning  may  be  that  of 
a  tract  of  land  suited  for,  or  brought  under,  culti 
vation. 

The  Homeric  names  of  countries  and  places,  as  far 
as  we  can  trace  them,  appear  to  be  derived  — 

1.  From  an  individual  founder  :  as  Ithake  from  Itha- 
kos,  Dardanie  from  Dardanos.1 

2.  From  a  race  in  occupation  or  in  ascendancy  : 
as  Acha'iis  from  Achaoi,  Crete  or  Cretai,  from 
Cretes.2 

3.  From  a  race  in  occupation,  which  race  has  itself 
derived  its  name  from  features  or  circumstances  of  the 
country:  as  Threke  from  Threkes,  Thracians ;  the 
race  in  turn  taking  a  name  related  to  the  rough  char- 
acter of  a  highland  country,  and  probably  proceeding 
from  the  same  root  with  tQtjxvg.  So  again,  Aigialeia 
from  the  Aigialeis,  these  being  named  from  Aigia- 
1  o  s,  the  strip  of  coast  afterwards  called  Achaia. 

4.  From  these  local  features  or  physical  incidents 
directly,  like  Aigialos:  or  like  Euboie,  which  ap- 
parently signifies  the  adaptation  of  that  fertile  island 
to  tillage ;  an  adaptation  which  afterwards  made  it  the 
granary  of  Athens. 

It  is  plain,  negatively,  that  the  word  Argos  has  no 
connection  with  any  of  the  three  first-named  sources. 
The  suggestion  already  made  would  attach  it  to  the 
fourth.  It  would  then  apply  to  Argos  of  the  Eastern 
Peloponnesos,  as  the  Argos  aat'  llopjv. 

The  word  argos  is  used  adjectively  by  Homer  for 

1  Od.  xvii.  207 ;  II.  xx.  216.  2  Qd.  xiv.  199. 


/ 


54 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


dogs,  II.  i.  50  ;  for  oxen,  II.  xxiii.  30  ;  and  for  a  goose, 
Od.  xv.  161.  And  we  have  these  compounds  into 
which  it  enters : 


The  sense  of  whiteness  or  brightness  may  apply  to 
every  one  of  these  uses,  both  primitive  and  derivative : 
but  whiteness  or  brightness  could  only  be  applicable  to 
such  districts  of  country  as  might  be  chalky  or  sandy ; 
and  this  sense  therefore  will  in  no  way  assist  us  to- 
wards an  explanation  of  the  territorial  name  Argos 
with  its  very  wide  application. 

If  Argos  have  a  connection  with  egyov,  then  it  at 
once  admits  the  sense  of  an  extent  of  land  tilled  or 
suitable  for  tillage,  a  sense  nearly  akin,  though  not 
similar  in  etymology,  to  that  of  the  word  4  lowlands.' 
For  ergon  in  Homer,  while  it  is  applicable  to  indus- 
trial operations  generally,  is  primarily  and  specially 
applied  to  agriculture.1 

We  can,  then,  conceive  how,  out  of  many  districts, 
all  fitly  described  as  lowlands,  in  one,  from  being 
merely  a  description,  it  would  become  a  proper  name  ; 
and  how,  at  the  next  stage  in  the  process,  it  would 
give  a  designation  to  its  inhabitants.  In  accordance 
with  this  supposition,  we  have  more  than  one  Argos  in 
Homer :  and  in  the  historic  period  we  have  Argos  of 
Orestisin  Macedonia,  Argos  of  Amphilochia  in  Western 
Greece,  and  Argos  near  Larissa  in  Thessaly.  But 
only  one  Argos  is  inhabited  by  Argeioi.   Just  as  there 


1.  apyrjg  (nepavvog). 

2.  upytKepavvog. 

3.  apyeorr/g  (Ndrof). 

4.  upyevvat  oteg,  bdovai. 


5.  apyivoeig  (Ku/ueipog) . 

6.  apytodovTeg  (veg). 

7.  upymoSeg  (nvveg). 

8.  Hodupyrjg,  a  horse  of  Achilles. 


1  Od.  vi.  259. 


THE  THREE  GREAT  APPELLATIVES. 


55 


are  Highlands  of  Saxony  no  less  than  of  Scotland,  but 
only  the  Scotch  mountaineers  acquired  the  name  of 
Highlanders,  as  a  standing  and  ordinary  name. 

In  referring  Argos  to  a  common  root  and  signifi- 
cance with  EQyov,  we  are  not  bound  to  hold  that  it  at- 
tains its  initial  vowel  by  junction  with  the  particle  a  in 
its  intensive,  or  in  any  other,  sense.  For  we  have  the 
word  ergon,  and  also  its  derivatives,  in  this  form, 
handed  down  from  very  ancient  Greek.  Among  the 
four  tribes  of  Attica,  which  subsisted  until  the  time  of 
Cleisthenes,  one  was  that  of  the  husbandmen,  called 
Argades.  And  in  the  Elian  Inscription,  supposed  to 
date  about  the  fortieth  Olympiad,  or  more  than  six 
hundred  years  before  Christ,  we  have  the  word 
ergon,  in  the  form  argon  with  the  digamma,  as 
follows  — 

aire  feTtog  aire  fapyov} 

Another  probable  example  of  the  exchange  of  these 
vowels  is  in  aroo,  to  plough,  compared  with  era, 
the  earth.  In  the  Latin  tongue  we  find  both  forms 
preserved,  in  aro,  to  plough,  and  sero,  to  sow,  re- 
spectively. 

We  need  not  here  inquire  what  is  the  common  root 
of  zQyov  and  of  Argos.  But,  if  labor  be  the  idea  con- 
veyed, this  may  perhaps  suggest  a  meaning  for  the 
Homeric  adjective  argos  and  for  all  its  compounds. 
The  groundwork  of  that  meaning  may  be  conveyed  by 
the  word  4  strenuous.'  Sometimes  this  takes  the  form 
of  keenness,  and  then  follows  the  idea  of  swiftness : 
sometimes  it  takes  the  form  of  a  persevering  patience, 
and  then  slowness  is  not  less  appropriately  suggested. 

1  Museum  Criticum,  i.  536  ;  and  Marsh,  Horse  Pelasgicee,  p.  70. 


56 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


The  labor  of  a  dog  is  swift,  that  of  an  ox  is  patient : 
hence  we  have  laborious  oxen,  moving  slow  ;  laborious 
dogs,  moving  fast.  The  sense  of  whiteness  legiti- 
mately attaches  to  the  effect  of  rapid  motion  on  the 
eye.  This  explanation  will  perhaps  be  found  to  suit 
all  the  diversified  phrases  which  have  been  cited  above. 

And  (reverting  to  the  fountain-head),  we  perceive 
that  the  notion  of  strenuous  labor  will  adapt  itself 
to  other  uses  of  Argos.  We  may  consider  the  name  of 
the  ship  Argo  as  meaning  possibly  '  swift,'  but  prefer- 
ably 4  stout,'  able  to  do  battle  with  the  waves,  as  we 
now  say  a  good  or  a  gallant  ship.  Again,  this  sense 
suits,  far  more  fully  than  the  mere  idea  of  speed,  the 
noble  dog  Argos  of  the  Odyssey ;  for  whom  mere 
whiteness  would  be  a  vapid  description.  Once  more, 
we  have  in  the  AQyeicpovr^g  of  Homer  a  glimpse  of  the 
tradition  of  Argos  the  spy,  to  whom  we  naturally 
ascribe  a  strenuous  vigilance.  The  epithet  agyakzog, 
i  hard  or  difficult  to  cope  with,'  follows  in  the  train : 
while  the  later  word  dgyovvreg,1 c  idle,'  takes  up  the  idea 
of  slowness  at  the  point  where  it  passes  into  inertness. 

When  we  turn  from  Argos  to  its  derivative  Argeioi, 
we  find  subsidiary  evidence  to  the  effect  that  the  word 
properly  meant  a  husbandman,  a  rustic.  In  Suidas2 
we  have  the  proverb  Jigyuovg  oQag,  6  You  see  Argeioi,' 
with  the  explanation  TtaQoifiia  hti  %m  drsvoog  xat  xata- 
TtlfjatLxwg  oqojvtwv.2  Now  we  know  nothing  of  the 
Argives  as  inhabitants  of  Argolis,  which  would  lead 
to  the  belief  that  they  stared  hard,  or  conveyed  alarm 
by  their  looks.    But  if  the  word  Argeioi  meant  husband- 

1  Soph.  Fr.  288.  2  Suid.  in  voce. 

3  '  A  proverb  concerning  people  who  stare  hard  and  whose  looks 
cause  alarm/ 


THE  THREE  GREAT  APPELLATIVES. 


57 


men,  then,  as  the  population,  instead  of  living  dis- 
persedly  in  hamlets  (xoo/^oV)  gathered  into  towns, 
the  rural  part  of  the  community  would  gradually 
become  also  the  ruder  part,  and  from  this  point  the 
transition  is  easy  to  the  sense  of  a  wild  and  savage 
aspect. 

The  Latin  word  agrestis  stands  to  ager  as 
Argeios,  according  to  the  foregoing  argument,  stands 
to  Argos.  The  agrestis,  or  countryman,  was  op- 
posed to  the  urbanus,  or  townsman.  The  latter,  with 
its  Greek  correlative  aarziog,  came  by  degrees  to  mean 
a  person  of  polished  manners  ;  but  agrestis,  following 
the  movement  I  have  supposed  in  the  case  of  Argeios, 
came  to  mean  coarse,  wild,  barbarous.  Thus  Ovid 
says  of  the  River  Acheloos,  when  mutilated  by  the 
loss  of  his  horn  in  the  combat  with  Heracles, 

'  Vultus  Achelous  agrestes 
Et  lacerum  cornu  mediis  caput  abdidit  undis.' 1 

And  Cicero,  after  describing  the  battles  of  the  Spartan 
youth,  carried  on  with  nails  and  teeth  as  well  as  fists 
and  feet,  asks,  4  Quae  barbaries  Indica  vastior  atque 
agrestior  ? ' 2 

Again,  Suidas  gives  us  the  expression  ^QyeToif  which 
he  says  is  used  for  sheer  villains,  because  the  Argeioi 
are  held  up  in  plays  as  noted  thieves ;  for  which  he 
refers  to  a  lost  play  of  Aristophanes.  According  to 
the  view  I  have  given,  the  word  may  well  mean  robbers, 
since  theft  in  the  early  stages  of  society  always  fre- 
quents solitary  places. 

Again,  iEschines4  charges  Demosthenes  with  gross 


1  Ov.  Met.  ix.  96. 

3  In  voc.  'Apyelot  Qupeg, 


2  Cic.  Tusc.  Disp.  v.  27. 

4  De  Falsa  Legat.  p.  41,  1.  14. 


58 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


offences,  which  had  brought  upon  him  disparaging 
nicknames.  One  of  these  was  Argas ;  which  Suidas 
and  Hesychius  explain  as  the  name  of  a  snake,  signi- 
fying sharp  and  crafty.  But  iEschines  say  she  was 
called  Argas,  each  of  his  guardians  having  suits  against 
him  to  recover  money.  So  that  the  meaning  would  be 
6  crafty  in  getting  hold  of  the  money  of  others,'  homo 
trium  liter 'arum ,  a  sharper. 

Once  more.  Hesychius  on  the  name  Argeioi  says, 
Ix  rwv  Eiltotcov  ol  marevo^evoi  ovtwg  eXsyovro,  rj  XapTtQOi, 
6  those  Helots  distinguished  for  fidelity  are  so  called.' 
Why  was  it  that  select  and  confidential  Helots  thus 
received  the  name  of  Argeioi?  That  name  may 
have  retained  its  local  force,  as  applicable  to  the  whole 
Pelopid  dominion,  long  after  Homer :  and  it  may  also, 
apart  from  its  use  as  a  proper  name,  have  borne  the 
meaning  of  a  free  or  ordinary  agricultural  settler. 
The  Helot  was  a  serf  by  the  fortune  of  war ;  but  he 
was  a  serf  whose  forefathers  had,  according  to  this 
view,  been  Argeioi.  If  then  a  Helot  made  himself 
conspicuous,  and  acquired  the  confidence  of  his  lord  by 
fidelity  and  smartness,  it  would  seem  a  very  natural 
reward  to  efface  from  him  the  brand  of  his  captivity, 
and  give  him  the  old  name  of  the  free  countryman  of 
that  part  of  Greece.  In  this  case  Argeios  might  mean 
a  libertus,  without  a  defined  formula  of  emancipation. 

It  is  worth  remark  that  the  cognate  word  agrios 
appears  to  have  gone  through  the  same  process  as 
agrestis  and  Argeios.  For  there  was  an  iEtolian 
prince  Agrios,1  a  grand-uncle  of  Diomed,  two  genera- 
tions before  the  War  of  Troy.    In  the  contemporary 


i  II.  xiv.  117. 


THE  THREE  GREAT  APPELLATIVES. 


59 


language  of  the  Poet,  Agrios  had  come  to  mean  savage 
and  cruel,  and  is  so  applied  to  Poluphemos.1  The  in- 
termediate meaning  probably  was  that  of  a  dweller  in 
a  wild  and  unsettled  place.  The  word  is  never  used 
to  describe  the  passion,  or  the  cruelty,  of  Achilles. 

It  should  also  be  noted  that  Argeioi,  where  applied 
to  the  Greeks  at  large,  never  means  the  chiefs,  but 
always  the  mass ;  whereas  the  word  Achaios  has,  as 
we  shall  see,  in  many  places  a  decided  leaning 
towards  the  aristocracy.  Epithets  are  scarcely  ever 
given  by  Homer  to  the  Argeian  name.  Only  in  four 
passages  do  they  appear.  In  II.  iv.  242  they  are  Io^qoi. 
and  hlsyx&g,  'dishonored  ; '  in  II.  xiv.  479  Io^ojqoi^2  and 
amildar  u-Aogritoi.  These  are,  in  each  case,  not  descrip- 
tive epithets  attaching  to  or  indicating  general  charac- 
ter, but  reproaches  growing  out  of  the  occasion.  In 
II.  xxi.  429  they  are  daQjjxzoi',  clad  in  breastplates, 
which,  from  the  context,  seems  to  do  no  more  than 
state  a  fact :  the  phrase  is  equivalent  to  '  the  Greeks 
in  arms/  In  II.  xix.  269,  the  Argeioi  are  called 
yiXoTttolziAoi,  lovers  of  battle  ;  and  this  appears  to  be  the 
sole  passage  in  which  an  epithet  of  description,  pro- 
perly so  called,  is  attached  to  the  word.  But  the 
Danaan  name,  though  more  rarely  used,  has  epithets 
in  twenty-two  passages ;  and  the  Achaian  name  in 
nearly  130.  This  circumstance  tends  to  show,  that 
the  Argeian  name  properly  belongs  to  the  commonalty 
or  masses,  rather  than  to  the  chiefs. 

We  have  assumed  above,  in  accordance  with  the 

1  Od.  ix.  215,  494. 

2  I  render  lofiupoi,  not  archers,  a  sense  neither  suited  to  the  passage 
nor  to  the  general  armament  of  the  Greeks,  who  were  not,  as  a  rule, 
archers  ;  but  braggarts,  loud  talkers,  in  close  harmony  with  the  sister- 
phrase  aneihauv  anoprjToi  —  insatiate  of  boasts. 


60 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


general  Greek  tradition,  that  the  Pelasgoi  were  the 
first  agricultural  settlers  of  the  peninsula  ;  but  that 
their  name,  and  any  other  cognate  names,  were  sup- 
pressed or  thrown  into  the  shade  by  the  dynastic  name, 
which  a  Danaos  probably  gave  to  his  people.  That 
name,  again,  naturally  disappearing  with  the  accession 
of  another  line  to  his  throne  and  dominions,  the  name 
Argeioi,  taken  either  from  the  occupation  of  the 
people  (like  Argades),  or  from  the  settlement  they 
had  made,  would  take  its  place  with  great  propriety, 
in  lieu  of  reverting  to  the  Pelasgic  name,  which  would 
silently  pass  out  of  use,  as  that  of  a  race  conquered  and 
therefore  comparatively  depressed. 

The  third  and  most  weighty  of  the  Great  Appella- 
tives is  Achaioi. 

The  evidence  of  the  Poems  will  I  think  suffice  to 
show  — 

1.  That  this  is  the  most  familiar  designation  of  the 
Greeks  of  Homer. 

2.  That  the  manner  of  its  use  indicates,  among  the 
Greeks  of  Homer,  the  political  predominance  of  an 
Aclraian  race  over  other  races  ranged  by  its  side  in  the 
War,  and  composing  along  with  it  the  nation  which 
owned  Agamemnon  for  its  head. 

3.  That,  besides  its  national  use,  the  name  of  the 
Achaioi  has  a  local  use  in  many  parts  of  Greece. 

4.  That  the  manner  of  this  local  use  points  out  with 
sufficient  clearness,  that  the  rise  of  the  Achaian  name 
was  contemporary  with  that  of  the  family  of  Pelops. 

The  first  proposition  may  be  at  once  settled  by  the 
rude,  but  not  inconclusive,  test  of  numbers.  While 
the  Danaan  name  is  used  about  160  times,  of  which 
thirteen  are  in  the  Odyssey;  and  the  Argeian  205 


THE  THREE  GREAT  APPELLATIVES.  61 

times,  of  which  twenty-eight  are  in  the  Odyssey  ;  the 
Achaian  name  is  used  about  597  times  in  the  Iliad,  and 
117  in  the  Odyssey,  making  714  in  all.  This  fre- 
quency of  use  in  the  two  poems  of  itself  goes  far  to 
determine  that  the  Achaian  designation  was  the  most 
modern  of  the  three. 

It  is  also  worth  observing,  that  in  the  opening  of  the 
Iliad  the  word  Achaioi  is  used  five  times,  before  Danaoi 
or  Argeioi  are  introduced  at  all. 

We  have  seen  that  the  Danaan  name  is  never  used 
in  the  singular ;  and  that  the  Argeian  name  is  so  used 
only  in  its  local  sense.  But  the  Achaian  name,  and 
that  only,  is  used  in  the  singular  to  designate  an  in- 
dividual as  belonging  to  the  nation  ;  with  the  reserve, 
however,  of  a  separate  shade  of  meaning,  sometimes 1 
tending  to  attach  it  to  a  class.  So  the  Poet  uses 
dagdavog  avijq 2  for  a  Trojan  or  a  Dardanian. 

Again,  Homer  has  worked  this  name  into  the  female 
forms  Achaiides,  Achaiiades,  Achaiai,  to  sig- 
nify the  women  of  Greece ;  but  has  made  no  such  use 
of  the  Danaan  or  Argeian  3  names. 

Also  the  phrase  vhg  'Aiaiwv,  sons  of  the  Achaians, 
has  no  correlation  with  the  Danaan  or  Argeian  names, 
and  further  helps  to  show  the  predominant  familiarity 
of  this  designation.  What  the  patronymic  was  to  the 
individual,  this  form  of  speech  was  to  the  nation  —  an 
appeal  to  a  standard  of  honor,  an  incentive  under  the 
form  of  an  embellishment. 

Epithets  are  given  to  the  name  Achaioi  in  130 
places,  besides  eight  or  ten  more  in  which  they  are 
used  either  for  the  women,  or  for  the  word  in  its 
territorial  sense.    And  the  familiar  use  of  the  word 


i  U.  iii.  167,  226. 


2  II.  ii.  701. 


3  Supra,  pp.  36,  44. 


62 


JUYENTUS  MUNDI. 


Achaiis  for  the  country  is  a  proof  of  the  prevalence, 
ascendancy,  and  familiarity  of  the  name,  which  was 
thus  applied  on  its  own  merits,  so  to  speak,  and  not, 
like  Argos,  because  it  was  the  proper  designation  of 
the  most  eminent  part  of  the  country. 

When  we  look  to  the  character  of  these  epithets,  we 
find  them  such  as  point  to  the  Achaians  in  the  charac- 
ter of  a  dominant  race  or  aristocracy. 

In  one  or  two  cases  we  have  epithets  of  reproach, 
such  as  were  addressed  to  the  army  at  critical  mo- 
ments :  dvalmdeg,  II.  XV.  326  ;  aTtsihjz^Qsg,  II.  vii.  96, 
and  in  the  same  passage  Idxattdeg.  In  a  few  others  we 
have  them  as  simple  descriptions  of  circumstances  of 
the  moment.1  But  the  pointed  epithets,  descriptive 
of  character,  are  as  follows :  — 

1.  8ioi,  worthy  or  noble  :  II.  v.  451  ;  Od.  iii.  116,  et  alibi. 

2.  shxwTteg,  from  the  rapid  motion  of  the  eye  giving  bright- 
ness :  II.  iii.  239,  et  alibi. 

3.  ivxvTjpidsg,  stoutly-greaved  :  II.  iii.  304 ;  Od.  iii.  149, 
and  in  thirty-two  other  places. 

4.  ijQCjeg,  heroes:  II.  xii.  165,  et  alibi. 

5.  xaQrjxoiAOcovreg,  with  flowing  or  abundant  hair:  II.  ii.  11 ; 
Od.  i.  90,  and  in  twenty-seven  other  places. 

6.  lAEyddvfAOi,  high-spirited :  II.  i.  123",  135 ;  Od.  xxiv.  57. 

7.  (i&'vsa  Ttveiovreg,  ardent :  II.  iii.  8. 

8.  %odxoxvtj[itdEg,  with  greaves  of  ialx.bg  or  copper :  II.  vii. 
41. 

9.  %alxo%k<m>£g,  with  armor  for  tunics :  II.  i.  371 ;  Od.  i. 
286,  and  in  twenty-two  other  places. 

10.  v7teQxvdavt8gs  exulting:  II.  iv.  66,  71. 

11.  dorjcpiloi,  lovers  of  war:  II.  vi.  73;  xvi.  303;  xvii. 
319. 

12.  qnloTtrolsfioi,  lovers  of  battle  :  II.  xvii.  224. 

1  II.  xii.  29 ;  xiii.  15 ;  xv.  44. 


THE  THREE  GREAT  APPELLATIVES. 


63 


These  epithets  are  very  marked  in  character  ;  they 
describe  courage,  personal  beauty,  well-made  and  well- 
finished  arms,  or  excellence  generally. 

The  epithets  given  to  Danaoi  are  exclusively  those 
of  a  soldiery:  those  of  Achaioi  are  more  extended, 
and  seem  to  extend  to  nobility  of  race. 

The  epithet  dios  is,  in  my  opinion,  wrongly  trans- 
lated i  divine  ; '  and  much  confusion  arises  from  the 
attempt  to  apply  that  sense  to  the  various  uses  of  the 
word.  But  if  we  understand  it  to  mean  a  limited  or 
special  excellence,  excellence  in  its  own  kind,  we  have 
no  difficulty  in  understanding  how  Eumaios 1  and  Cly- 
temnestra  2  can  both  receive  it,  the  one  for  his  trusty 
character,  the  other,  the  sister  of  Helen,  for  her  beauty. 
There  is,  however,  one  other  sense  which  might  be 
given  to  it,  that  of  high-born,  well-descended,  which 
perhaps  would  not  be  less  adapted  to  all  the  cases  of 
its  use. 

In  the  plural,  Homer  applies  it  to  Achaians  and 
Pelasgians  only.  This  rare  use  supplies  a  presumption 
of  some  peculiar  meaning  ;  and  it  may  be  thought  that 
the  Achaians  are  dm  because  both  of  their  blood  and 
of  their  power  and  predominance,  the  Pelasgians  be- 
cause of  their  antiquity. 

It  is  Thersites,  who  in  the  Second  Iliad  attempts  to 
stir  up  the  soldiery  by  calling  them  Achaiides,  or 
she-Greeks.  It  is  to  be  noted,  that  in  his  short  speech, 
of  which  an  inflated  presumption  is  the  principal  mark, 
the  Achaian  name  is  used  five  times  within  nine  lines, 
and  neither  of  the  other  names  is  used  at  all.  In  two 
of  these  cases,  the  speaker  pointedly  calls  himself  an 
Achaian.    Probably  the  upstart  and  braggart  uses  this 


Od.  xiv.  48,  and  in  ten  other  places. 


2  Od.  iii.  266. 


64 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


name  only  because  it  was  the  most  distinguished  or 
aristocratic  name,  as  an  ill-bred  person  always  takes 
peculiar  care  to  call  himself  a  gentleman. 

There  are,  however,  numerous  single  passages,  in 
which  the  simple  term  Achaioi  appears  from  the 
context  to  have  a  special,  sometimes  perhaps  even  an 
exclusive  reference  to  the  chiefs  and  leaders,  or  to  the 
officers  and  higher  class,  of  the  army.  And  if  this 
be  so,  then  we  must  consider  the  national  use  of  the 
name  as  derivative  like  that  of  Argeioi,  the  whole 
being  named  from  the  prime  part ;  but  with  this  differ- 
ence, that  in  the  case  of  Achaioi  it  is  the  prime  blood 
of  the  country,  in  that  of  Argeioi  the  prime  seat  of 
power. 

The  injured  priest,  Chruses,  solicits  all  the  Achaioi, 
and  most  of  all  the  two  Atridai.  All  the  Achaians 
.  assent,  except  Agamemnon.1  There  is  no  sign  that 
he  solicited  the  army.  In.  truth,  this  could  only  be 
done  in  an  Assembly ;  and  there  was  no  Assembly. 
It  follows,  that  the  Achaioi  here  mean  the  chiefs. 
But  when  Chruses  invokes  the  vengeance  of  the  god 
upon  the  army  at  large,  the  phrase  alters  to  Danaoi.2 
The  actual  division  of  booty  is,  from  the  nature  of 
the  case,  a  matter  that  must  have  rested  principally  or 
wholly  in  the  hands  of  the  chiefs.  When  this  matter 
is  referred  to,  Agamemnon  says,  Do  not  let  me,  alone 
of  the  Argeians,  that  is,  of  all  the  Greeks,  go  with- 
out a  prize  ; 3  and  Nestor  uses  the  same  word,  when 
he  stimulates  the  army  at  large  by  the  hope  of  booty.4 
But  Achilles  replies  to  Agamemnon  that  the  Achaians 
have  no  means  of  compensating  him 5  there  and  then, 
since  they  hold  no  common  stock  in  reserve.  The 

i  II.  i.  15,  22,  26-32.  2  n.  i.  42.  s  n.  i.  H8. 

4  II.  ii.  350-356.  5  11.  i.  123. 


THE  THREE  GREAT  APPELLATIVES. 


65 


phrase  is  the  same  in  subsequent  passages.1  So  far 
then  the  Achaian  name  seems  to  fall  especially  to  the 
chiefs. 

The  same  leaning  may  be  observed,  when  reference 
is  made  to  other  governing  duties.  Achilles,  in  his 
adjuration  by  the  staff  or  sceptre,  the  symbol  of  gov- 
erning power,  describes  it  as  borne  by  the  sons  of  the 
Achaians,  obviously  the  kings,  chiefs,  or  persons  in  au- 
thority. 

When  Priam  on  the  wall  of  Troy  inquires  from 
Helen  the  names  of  two  prominent  commanders,  he 
both  times  asks,  who  is  that  Achaian  ?  2  and  in  the 
second  case,  the  king  describes  him  as  out-topping  the 
Argeians  by  his  head  and  his  broad  shoulders.  Here 
the  Achaian  seems  to  mean  the  prince  or  noble ;  the 
Argeians,  the  soldiery  at  large.  Indeed,  the  words  are 
hardly  susceptible  of  any  other  construction ;  and  they 
seem  almost  to  warrant  of  themselves  the  conclusion 
that  the  Achaian  name  is  properly  that  of  a  dominant 
race,  grown,  generally  speaking,  into  a  class,  and  pos- 
sibly including  others  of  that  class,  although  not  of 
Achaian  descent. 

In  the  historic  ages  of  Greece,  the  Achaian  name 
acquired  a  local  force,  similar  to  that  of  the  Argive 
name,  in  exclusive,  or  almost  exclusive,  connection 
with  one  particular  district.  We  cannot  say  that  it 
has  in  this  sense,  if  strictly  taken,  a  local  use  in  Homer. 
Yet  we  find  the  Achaians  in  many  parts  of  Greece  men- 
tioned in  such  a  way,  as  to  distinguish  them  from  other 

1  II.  i.  135,  162,  392 ;  ii.  227.  In  II.  ii.  256,  the  giving  is  by  the 
rjpues  Aavao'i.  The  passage  has  the  obelos ;  but  it  is  not  out  of  har- 
mony with  my  argument. 

2  II.  iii.  167,  226. 

5 


66 


JUYENTUS  MUNDI. 


inhabitants  of  the  country,  either  in  the  same  or  in 
neighboring  tracts. 

1.  We  have  already,  seen  that  the  name  Achaioi 
had  come  into  use  among  the  people  of  Mycenae  and 
of  Argos  a  generation  before  the  War  ;  and  that  it  is 
used  of  them  in  contradistinction  to  the  Kadmeioi  of 
Boeotia.1  At  earlier  epochs  they  are  called  Argeioi ; 
but  we  are  not  to  suppose  that  this  name  had  fallen 
into  local  desuetude,  even  though  the  other  might  be 
more  in  vogue.  We  shall  see  that  the  Myrmidons  of 
Achilles  afford  us  an  example  of  a  race,  or  body,  who 
bore  more  names  than  one. 

2.  It  has  also  been  shown  that,  in  the  legend  of 
the  Eleventh  Iliad  about  the  Epeian  War,  the  Pulian 
party  are  called  Achaians  at  the  period  of  the  youth 
of  Nestor ;  and  this  in  apparent  contradistinction  to 
their  opponents,  who  therefore  were  not  Achaian  at 
all  at  that  time,  or  not  Achaian  in  the  same  eminent 
sense. 

3.  The  troops  of  Achilles,  always  called  Myrmidons 
among  the  other  divisions  of  the  army  in  the  field,  in- 
habited, as  we  find  from  the  Catalogue,  Hellas  and 
Phthie,2  and  bore,  evidently  with  some  distinctive 
force,  the  name  of  Hellenes,  and  likewise  that  of 
Achaioi.3  In  the  Ninth  Iliad,  Achilles  describes  the 
women  of  the  same  tract  of  country  as  Achaiides.4 
On  the  origin  of  the  name  6  Myrmidon,'  which  this 
division  of  the  army  had  wholly  to  itself,  Homer 
throws  no  light.  Hellenes  they  were,  as  inhabitants 
of  Hellas 5  in  the  special  sense  of  the  word.    And  as 

i  II.  iv.  384 ;  v.  803 ;  vi.  223.  2  II.  ii.  683. 

3  11=  ii.  684.  4  ii.  ix.  395 

6  See  infra,  Chap.  IV. 


THE  THREE  GREAT  APPELLATIVES. 


67 


the  Achaian  name  in  Homer  is  not  territorial,  we 
must  suppose  them  to  have  borne  it  in  virtue  of  their 
blood,  the  Myrmidons  being  probably  a  subdivision  of 
the  great  Achaian  family. 

4.  Of  the  five  races  1  who  inhabited  Crete  at  the  time 
of  the  Troica,  four  were  named  Eteocretes,  Pelasgoi, 
Kudones,  and  Dorieis  :  the  fifth,  which  is  named  first, 
perhaps  by  reason  of  political  predominance,  was  Acha- 
ian. The  appearance  in  this  passage  of  the  Dorian 
name,  together  with  the  Achaian,  subdivides,  more 
pointedly  than  any  other  passage  in  the  Poems,  the 
Hellenic  family. 

5.  Again,  a  portion  of  the  force  of  Diomed  is  de- 
scribed as  composed  of  those  '  who  held  iEgina  and 
Mases,  Achaian  youths.'  2  The  site  of  Mases  appears 
to  be  unknown.  But  tradition,  according  to  Pausanias, 
gave  the  name  of  Pelops  to  the  small  islands  off  the 
coast  of  Troizen.3  Such  a  tradition  corresponds  re- 
markably with  the  indirect  testimony  of  the  verse 
I  have  quoted,  if  there  be  a  relation,  as  I  suppose,  be- 
tween the  rise  of  the  family  of  Pelops  and  the  predom- 
inance of  the  Achaians. 

6.  On  turning  to  the  dominions  of  Odysseus,  we 
find  that  three  names  are  used  to  describe  their  in- 
habitants :  Kephallenes,  Ithakesioi,  and  Achaioi. 

The  first  is  used  four  times  in  the  Odyssey,4  and  is 
the  distinctive  name  in  the  Iliad  of  the  military  con- 
tingent led  by  Odysseus.  We  shall  find  that  it  ap- 
pears to  indicate  the  predominance  of  the  Hellenic  ele- 
ment.5 

1  Od.  xix.  175-177.  2  n.  n  552. 

3  Paus.  ii.  34.  4,  p.  191.         4  Od.  xx.  210 ;  xxiv.  354,  377,  428. 
5  Infra,  Chap.  IV. 


68 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


The  suitors 1  are  ordinarily  called  'A%aio[,  never 
AgysToi  or  Javaol.  They  constituted  the  aristocracy 
of  the  islands.  It  appears  that  either  they  were  an 
Achaian  race,  or  else  they  were  called  Achaian  because 
they  were  an  aristocracy. 

The  sway  of  Odysseus  appears  to  have  depended 
upon  his  personal  qualities.  Like  his  father  Laertes,2 
he  was  both  a  conqueror  and  an  economist.  Accord- 
ingly, his  long  absence  is  fatal  to  his  power ;  though 
Menelaos,  after  an  absence  almost  as  long,3  resumed 
his  throne  without  impediment.  When  Odysseus  re- 
appears, his  final  proceedings  against  the  Suitors  are 
attended  with  precautions,  evidently  dictated  by  his 
fear  of  the  people.  And  in  the  Assembly  of  the  last 
Book,  whilst  more  than  one  half  take  up  arms  against 
him,4  the  rest  simply  remain  neutral :  he  has  no  posi- 
tive aid  to  rely  on,  except  that  of  his  father,  his  son, 
and  a  mere  handful  of  immediate  dependants.  Dur- 
ing his  absence  the  Suitors  are  ruining  him,  but  are 
not  said  to  oppress  the  people.  All  this  looks  as  if  his 
family  was  perhaps  of  foreign  or  extraneous  origin, 
and  in  any  case  had  recently  attained  to  power. 

Autolucos,  the  maternal  grandfather  of  Odysseus, 
resided  at  Parnesos  in  Phokis : 5  Penelope  has  no 
trace  of  connection  with  Southern  Greece :  her  sister 
Iphthime  was  married  to  Eumelos,  heir-apparent  of 
Pherai  in  Thessaly.6  Of  Arkeisios,  the  father  of 
Laertes,  with  whom  the  genealogy  begins,  we  have  no 
trace  in  Ithaca.  But  we  do  hear  of  an  eponymist  or 
founder,  Ithacos,7  who,  with  Neritos  the  eponymist  of 

i  Od.  ii.  51 ;  xvi.  122.  2  Od.  xxiy.  205-207,  377. 

3  Od.  iv.  82.  4  Od.  xxiv.  463. 

5  Od.  xix.  394.  6  Od.  iv.  798. 

7  Od.  xvii.  203-207. 


THE  THREE  GREAT  APPELLATIVES. 


69 


the  chief  mountain  of  the  island,  and  Poluctor,  con- 
structed the  fountain,  from  which  the  city  was  supplied 
with  water.  A  descendant  of  this  Poluctor,  probably 
his  son,  by  name  Peisandros,1  appears,  with  the  title 
of  an  ax,  among  the  leading  Suitors.  He  may  not  im- 
possibly have  represented  a  family,  displaced  by  Laertes 
from  the  sovereignty,  of  this  island  dominion.  I  say  by 
Laertes,  because  if  Arkeisios  had  founded  the  sover- 
eignty in  Ithaca,  it  appears  probable  that  Odysseus 
would  have  taken  his  patronymic  from  that  personage, 
and  not  from  his  father. 

But,  apart  from  the  question  to  what  root  the  family 
of  Odysseus  is  to  be  referred,  it  seems  plain  that  either 
the  Suitors,  being  the  aristocracy,  were  Achaian  in 
blood  ;  or,  because  they  were  the  aristocracy,  they  fell 
under  the  designation  of  Achaians. 

When  the  mass  of  the  people  are  gathered  in  As- 
sembly, they  are  invariably  addressed,  not  as  Achaioi, 
but  as  Ithakesioi.2  And  when, instead  of  the  inhabi- 
tants of  the  island,  the  subjects  throughout  the  domin- 
ion are  spoken  of,  they  are  called  Kephallenes,  the 
name  always  given  to  the  military  division  in  the 
Iliad.3 

When  the  Suitor  Eurumachos  expresses  a  misgiving 
lest,  in  lieu  of  Penelope,  it  should  prove  he  would 
have  done  more  wisely  in  courting  some  other  dame, 
he  says  there  are  many  (other)  Achaiides4  in  Ithaca, 
and  in  the  other  territories.  This  must  surely  refer  to 
women  of  noble  birth. 

It  is  true  that,  in  the  Second  Odyssey,  Telemachos 
summons  4  the  Achaians  '  to  the  Assembly.5    But  we 

1  Od.  xviii.  299.  2  Od.  ii.  25,  161,  229  ;  xxiv.  453,  531. 

3  Qd.  xxiv.  354.  *  Od.  xxi.  251.  5  Od.  ii.  7. 


70 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


find  in  Scherie  that  principal  persons  only  seem  to 
have  been  summoned  man  by  man,1  though  all  classes 
usually  attended.  Again,  in  the  Ithacan  Assembly  ot 
the  Twenty-fourth  Book,  Eupeithes  complains  of  the 
harm  Odysseus  has  done  the  Achaians.2  The  Suitors, 
whom  he  has  slain,  were  (he  says)  far  and  away,  the 
aQimoi,  the  aristocracy,  of  the  Kephallenes.  This  is 
exactly  conformable  to  the  view  I  have  taken.  When 
Eupeithes  ceases,  we  are  told  that  pity  seized  all  the 
Achaians.3  This  seems  to  mean  the  party  of  the 
Suitors,  those  allied  with  them  by  blood  or  interest,  or 
near  them  in  station.  For,  shortly  after,  the  Assem- 
bly divides,  part  taking  arms  against  Odysseus,  and 
part,  by  the  advice  of  Halitherses,  remaining  neutral. 

We  have  also  to  consider  the  word  Panachaioi. 
It  is  used  eleven  times  in  Homer.  We  cannot  take  it 
for  a  mere  synonym  of  Achaioi.  Seven  times  out 
of  the  eleven,  it  appears  in  the  expression  aQiatTjsg 
llavaxaiojv.  In  conformity  with  the  sense  of  the  word 
reav,  we  may  assign  to  the  compound  a  cumulative  and 
collective  force :  so  that  Panachaioi  would  mean  the 
entire  body  of  the  Achaians,  or  all  classes  of  the  Greeks. 
In  the  other  passages4  where  the  word  occurs,  this 
sense  is  very  suitable,  and  especially  in  the  passage  of 
the  Iliad  where  Odysseus,  interceding  with  Achilles, 
says,  '  If  you  do  not  care  for  Agamemnon,  yet  pity 
the  Panachaioi/  or  the  Greeks  at  large.5 

I  have  now  collected  the  particulars  connected  with 
the  use  of  the  three  Great  Appellatives  in  Homer,  and 
presented  them  to  the  reader  sufficiently,  as  I  hope, 


i  Od.  viii.  10.  2  Od.  xxiv.  426. 

4  II.  ix.  301 :  Od.  i.  239  ;  xiv.  369 ;  xxiv.  32. 


3  Od.  xxiv.  438. 
5  II.  ix.  300. 


THE  THREE  GREAT  APPELLATIVES. 


71 


for  certain  purposes.  These  purposes  are,  first  to 
establish  in  their  due  order  the  succession  of  the 
periods  at  which  they  had  respectively  obtained  some 
root  in  the  country :  next  to  show  that  the  most 
proper  national  name  of  the  Greeks  at  the  time  of 
Homer,  the  name  most  nearly  approaching  to  what  we 
mean  by  a  national  name,  was  that  of  the  Achaioi : 
thirdly,  to  exhibit,  as  the  specific  shades  of  mean- 
ing.  attaching  to  the  three  Appellatives  respectively, 

(1)  for  Danaoi,  the  soldiery,  the  people  in  warfare; 

(2)  for  Argeioi,  the  masses,  the  people  engaged  in 
tillage ;  (3)  for  Achaioi,  the  chiefs  or  aristocracy,  the 
people  regarded  through  the  governing  class. 

This  class,  and  the  race  that  formed  it,  appear  to  me 
to  be  entitled  to  a  more  separate  and  concentrated 
attention  than  it  has  as  yet  received  in  the  investiga- 
tion of  Greek  history.  It  forms  a  distinct  type  of 
Hellenic  character,  the  earliest  in  time,  and  certainly 
not  the  least  remarkable  in  grandeur  or  in  complete- 
ness. The  Greek  of  Homer  is  neither  the  man  of 
Athens  nor  the  man  of  Sparta :  he  is  neither  cast  in 
the  Dorian  nor  in  the  Ionian  pattern :  he  is  the 
Achaian  Greek.  Simple,  and  yet  shrewd  ;  passionate, 
and  yet  self-contained  ;  brave  in  battle,  and  gentle  in 
converse  ;  keenly  living  in  the  present,  yet  with  a 4  large 
discourse '  over  the  future  and  the  past ;  as  he  is  in 
body  6  full-limbed  and  tall,'  so  is  he  in  mind  towering 
and  full-formed.  His  portrait  could  never  have  been 
drawn  but  from  the  life  :  and,  disregarding  what  I  con- 
ceive to  have  been  the  figments  of  the  first  renaissance 
after  the  wild  and  rude  Dorian  revolution,  I  set  down 
Homer  himself  as  the  Achaian  painter  of  his  own  kith 
and  kin. 


72 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


It  will  however  be  requisite  to  inquire, 

1.  What  light  can  be  thrown  on  the  origin  of  the 
Achaian  name  through  the  growth  of  the  power  that 
brought  it  into  vogue. 

2.  How  it  was  superseded;  and  what  place  the 
three  Appellatives  respectively  occupy  in  the  later 
tradition  and  literature. 

But  this  will  best  be  done  after  we  have  examined 
and  illustrated,  as  far  as  may  be,  the  Homeric  use  of 
other  national  and  tribal  names,  especially  four  of 
them,  which,  though  of  much  rarer  occurrence,  are 
of  an  importance  scarcely  second  to  the  names  already 
discussed.    These  are  — 

1.  Pelasgoi. 

2.  Hellenes. 

3.  Phoinikes. 

4.  Aiolidai. 

We  may  then  sketch  in  outline  the  relative  position 
of  the  families  or  races  respectively  embraced  by  these 
Appellatives,  and  consider  what  they  severally  contrib- 
uted to  the  formation  of  the  great  Greek  nationality. 


CHAPTER  III. 


The  Pelasgoi. 

Respecting  the  Pelasgoi,  we  have  some  direct  and 
some  indirect  testimony  from  Homer.  And  we  have 
also  certain  supplements  to  this  Homeric  informa- 
tion— 

(1)  In  the  later  Greek  and  classical  tradition  ; 

(2)  In  the  results  of  modern  ethnological  and  archae- 
ological research. 

The  direct  testimony  of  Homer  establishes  — 

The  wide  extension  of  the  Pelasgoi. 

The  country  afterwards  called  Thessaly  bears  in  the 
Iliad  the  name  of  Pelasgic  Argos.3  It  furnished  to  the 
Greek  army  nine  contingents,  and  280  ships,  or  about 
one  fourth  of  the  entire  fleet.  And  this  seems  to  be 
the  only  name  which  it  bears  as  a  whole.  The  line,  in 
which  this  name  is  given,  is  evidently  prefatory  to  the 
great  Thessalian  division  of  the  Catalogue.2  Pelasgic 
Argos  appears  to  be  included  with  other  countries  in 
the  wider  name  of  Hellas ;  a  name  which  probably 
may  also  have  had  an  especial  application  to  the  part 


i  II.  ii.  681. 


2.  Studies  on  Homer,  vol.  i.  pp.  100-105. 


74 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


of  Thessaly  ruled  by  Peleus,  and  inhabited  by  the  Myr- 
midons. 

It  further  appears,  from  the  Odyssey,  that  the  Pelas- 
goi  were  one  of  the  five  nations  of  Crete.1 

And  we  learn  from  the  Trojan  Catalogue  in  the 
Second  Iliad,  that  the  Pelasgoi  of  Larissa  served  in  the 
War  among  the  allies  of  Troy.2 

The  facts  thus  exhibited,  though  few  and  simple, 
indicate  the  wide  extension  of  the  Pelasgoi,  who  thus 
appear  on  both  sides,  in  a  war  which  draws  the  armies 
engaged  in  it  from  so  considerable  an  extent  of  coun 
try. 

But  further;  Zeus,  the  Zeus  of  Dodona,  the  Zeus 
served  by  Hellic  interpreters  of  his  will,  is,  in  the  most- 
solemn  invocation  of  the  Iliad,  addressed  as  Pelasgic 
Zeus  3  by  Achilles,  the  greatest  representative  of  the 
Hellenic  mind  and  life. 

This  was  at  a  period  of  .complete  and  well  estab- 
lished Hellenic  predominance.  The  name  Pelasgicos 
is,  then,  evidently  an  archaic  name  of  Zeus  ;  and  it  is 
not  easy  to  see  how  he  could  have  received  it,  unless 
the  inhabitants  of  the  country  from  Dodona,  at  least 
as  far  as  the  kingdom  of  Peleus,  had  been  known  as 
Pelasgoi.  The  concurrent  evidence  of  this  passage 
with  that  of  the  line  in  which  all  Thessaly  is  called 
Pelasgic  Argos,  appears  to  demonstrate  that  Thessaly 
had  formerly  been  known  as  a  country  of  Pelasgoi, 
and  that  these  Pelasgoi  were  worshippers  of  Zeus. 

Accordingly,  of  the  nine  Thessalian  contingents, 
seven  are  described  by  the  places  they  inhabit,  without 
any  national  or  tribal  name.    It  is  probable  that  in 


i  Od.  xix.  177. 


2  II.  ii.  840. 


3  II.  xvi.  233. 


THE  PELASGOI. 


75 


these  districts  the  Pelasgian  name  had  not  yet  been 
superseded  by  any  other  designation  for  the  purposes 
of  familiar  use.  The  only  territorial  name  used  in 
this  part  of  the  Catalogue,  besides  Pelasgic  Argos,  is 
in  the  case  of  the  eminently  Hellenic  dominions  of 
Peleus. 

When  Homer  names  the  Pelasgoi  of  the  Trojan 
Catalogue,  he  describes  them  as  those  Pelasgoi  who 
inhabited  the  deep-loamed  Larissa.1  He  therefore  dis- 
tinguishes them  from  other  Pelasgoi.  But  he  cannot 
possibly  mean,  in  composing  for  a  Greek  audience,  to 
distinguish  them  from  the  only  other  Pelasgoi  men- 
tioned by  him,  those  of  Crete,  who  are  not  named  in 
the  Catalogue  or  in  the  Iliad  at  all.  It  is  likely,  then, 
that  he  refers  to  other  Pelasgoi  of  the  Trojan  army ; 
of  which  the  two  contingents  immediately  preceding 
this  one  are  described  without  any  national  or  tribal 
designation. 

Again,  the  Poet  does  not  simply  say,  '  Hippothoos 
led  Pelasgians,'  but,  '  he  led  tribes  (yvlci)  of  Pelas- 
gian s,'  thus  pointing  again  to  a  variety  of  tribes  com- 
prised under  that  name.  This  has  been  observed  by 
Strabo.2 

If  in  general  the  Achaians  were  paramount,  and  the 
Pelasgoi  were  subordinate  members  of  one  and  the 
same  community,  it  is  not  difficult  to  see  why  Homer 
should  nowhere  apply  the  Pelasgian  name  to  any  por- 
tion of  the  Greek  army ;  and  again,  why  the  same 
scruples  should  not  bind  him  as  to  a  portion  of  the 
Trojan  force. 

He  has  pursued  an  exactly  similar  course  with 


i  II.  ii.  841. 


2  xiii.  3,  p.  620. 


76 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


respect  to  the  Thracians.  He  mentions  them  in  the 
Trojan  Catalogue,  and  again  in  the  Trojan  army.1 
They  have  no  recognized  place  among  the  Greeks, 
and  yet  Thamuris,  evidently  a  Greek,  is  described  as 
Thracian.2  And  the  word  Threx  seems  to  mean 
Highlander,  in  opposition  to  Pelasgos  as  Lowlander. 
Probably  Thracians  existed  diffusively,  like  Pelasgians, 
among  the  Greeks ;  but  were  absorbed  in  designations 
more  prominent  and  splendid. 

We  have  yet  a  third  example.  The  Kaukones  appear 
in  the  Tenth  Iliad  as  part  of  the  Trojan  force.3  They 
are  nowhere  found  in  the  Greek  host,  or  in  the  Greek 
Catalogue.  But  in  the  Odyssey,  where  there  was  no 
reason  for  keeping  the  name  in  the  background,  as  the 
same  national  distinctions  did  not  require  to  be  kept 
in  view,  Homer  mentions  the  Kaukones  apparently  as 
a  people  dwelling  on  the  west  side  of  Greece,  for  the 
Pseudo-Mentor 4  is  going  among  them  from  Ithaca  to 
claim  payment  of  a  debt.  They  were  probably,  then, 
near  neighbors.  He  distinguishes  them  as  high- 
spirited  peyddvpoi :  which  reminds  us  of  the  reverence 
he  has  shown  for  the  ancient  possessors  of  the  country 
by  calling  the  Pelasgians  dioi. 

Again,  Homer,  in  the  three  passages  where  he  names 
Pelasgians,  names  them  each  time  with  a  laudatory 
epithet ;  a  circumstance  deserving  some  notice,  when 
we  observe  to  how  small  a  proportion  of  his  national  or 
tribal  names  epithets  are  attached. 

Once  he  calls  them  ly^oljirnQoi^  addicted  to  the  spear. 
He  elsewhere  uses  this  epithet  but  thrice ;  once  for  the 
Arcadians,6  whom,  in  the  only  other  place  where  they  are 

i  II.  ii.  844 ;  x.  434.       2  n.  n  594-6OO.       3  II.  x.  429  ;  xx.  329. 
Od.  iii.  366.  II.  vii.  134.  6  n.  ii.  611. 


THE  PELASGOI. 


77 


named,  lie  describes  as  skilled  in  fight ;  once  for  two 
royal  warriors  individually  ; 1  and  once  for  the  Myr- 
midons.2 This  epithet  then  is  of  high  rank  as  describ- 
ing valor. 

On  the  other  two  occasions  he  calls  the  Pelasgians 
dioi.3  This  epithet  implies,  sometimes,  perhaps  a 
narrow,  but  always  a  special  and  peculiar  excellence. 
And  it  is  one  which  Homer  allows  to  no  race  except 
only  the  Pelasgians  and  Achaians.4  There  is  no  dif- 
ficulty in  explaining  the  latter  use  of  it.  The  former 
is  also  appropriate,  if  we  suppose  the  Pelasgoi  to  be 
the  ancient  and  primary  base  of  the  Greek  nation. 

The  leaders  of  the  Pelasgoi  before  Troy  are  them- 
selves the  sons  of  Pelasgos,  who  was  the  son  of  Teutamas. 

Only  then  in  five  places  altogether  does  Homer  give 
us  traces  of  this  name  or  its  derivatives.  But  this 
affords  no  presumption  averse  to  the  hypothesis  that 
the  Pelasgians  were  the  base  of  the  Greek  nation ;  be- 
cause it  is  his  uniform  practice  to  throw  into  the  back- 
ground whatever  tends  to  connect  the  Hellenic  race 
with  foreign  origin  or  blood  ;  and  the  currency  of  the 
Pelasgian  name  beyond  the  limits  of  Greece,  and 
among  its  foes,  evidently  had  this  tendency  in  a  marked 
degree. 

The  Larisse 5  mentioned  in  the  Trojan  Catalogue 
appears  once  more  ; 6  and  on  both  occasions  it  has  an 
epithet  denoting  fertility.  The  tendency  of  this  epi- 
thet is  to  show  that  the  Pelasgoi  were  an  agricultural 
and  settled  people.     Of  this  we  shall  find  other  signs. 

When  we  come  to  the  historic  age,  we  find  many 

i  II.  ii.  692.  2  Od.  iii.  188.         3  ii.  x.  429  ;  Od.  xix.  177. 

4  II.  v.  451,  et  alibi.    5  II.  ii.  841.  6  n.  xvii.  301. 


78 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


Larisses  ; 1  and  the  mere  name  is  commonly  believed 
to  indicate  a  seat  of  the  Pelasgians.  But  in  Homer  we 
have  only  one  Larisse\  A  possible  explanation  is,  that 
Larisse  was  properly  the  name  of  a  fort  or  place  of 
refuge,  somewhat  like  the  bell-towers  of  Ireland  and 
other  countries,  to  which  the  people  of  the  district  be- 
took themselves  for  refuge  on  an  emergency,  from  their 
dwellings  in  the  surrounding  country.  Around  these 
forts,  as  happened  in  our  own  country  about  the  feudal 
castles,  towns  would  gather  by  a  gradual  process.  And 
so  the  application  of  the  word  Larisse  to  the  town  con- 
jointly with  the  district,2  of  which  we  seem  to  have  this 
single  example  in  Homer,  might  by  degrees  become 
common.  That  which  was  an  Argos,  or  settlement  for 
tillage,  in  the  original  or  Pelasgian  stage,  might,  after 
wars  had  taught  the  necessity  of  defence,  become  in 
some  cases  a  Larisse ;  while  in  others  the  old  name 
might  continue  :  or  the  one  .name  might  be  applied  to 
the  part  for  habitation,  the  other  to  the  part .  for  de- 
fence. This  hypothesis  is  supported  by  the  fact  that 
the  citadel  of  the  historic  Argos,  which  stood  upon  an 
eminence,  was  called  Larisse.3 

Such  are  the  direct  notices  of  the  Pelasgoi  in  Homer. 
They  are  scanty  in  amount.  But  there  are  three  other 
heads  of  Homeric  evidence  relating  to  them. 

1.  The  signs  of  alliance  between  the  Pelasgoi  and 
the  inhabitants  of  particular  parts  of  the  country : 

2.  The  signs  of  a  difference  of  race,  pervading  the 
population,  and  more  or  less  running  parallel  with  dif- 
ferences of  rank  : 

1  Cramer's  Greece,  vol.  iii.  p.  244. 

2  Comp.  evpvxopog  Qrjfiri,  and  the  passage  Od.  xi.  260-265. 

3  Strabo,  viii.  6,  p.  370. 


THE  PELASGOI.  79 

3.  The  signs  of  an  occupation  of  the  country  prior 
to  that  by  the  Hellenic  tribes : 

Independently  of  another  head  of  inquiry,  to  be 
dealt  with  at  a  later  stage,  namely  the  relation  of  the 
Trojan  to  the  Greek  race : 

And,  again,  independently  of  evidence  supplied  by 
the  later  tradition. 

1.  The  Arcades  1  of  Homer  show  signs  of  connection 
with  the  Pelasgoi. 

In  the  Catalogue  the  Arcades  are  described  as 
aywiiafflzod,  or  heavy-armed,2  and  we  are  also  told 
that  they  had  no  care  for  maritime  pursuits.  In  both 
respects,  their  relation  to  the  people  of  Troas  is  re- 
markable. Homer  nowhere  else  uses'  the  epithet 
except  for  the  Dardanians,  whose  position  in  Troas 
resembled  that  of  the  Arcadians  in  Peloponnesos.  And 
the  Trojans  were  so  destitute  of  vessels,  that  the  ship- 
wright who  built  for  Paris  is  mentioned  as  on  that 
account  a  notable  character.3  Nor  do  we  hear  of  a 
Trojan  ship  in  any  case  but  his.  Heavy-armed  troops 
are  furnished  by  a  settled  peasantry,  light-armed  by  a 
population  of  less  settled  habits.  The  absence  of 
maritime  pursuits  tends  to  imply  a  pacific  character, 
in  an  age  when  enterprise  by  sea  was  so  intimately 
connected  with  kidnapping  and  rapine.  Arcadia  was 
not  a  poor  country.  In  historic  times  it  was,  next  to 
Laconia,  the  most  populous  province  of  Peloponnesos,4 
In  the  Troica  it  supplied  sixty  ships  with  large  crews.5 
All  this  is  accordant  with  Pelasgian  associations. 

1  Niebuhr,  Hist,  of  Rome,  vol.  i.  p.  29,  sets  down  as  Pelasgian  the 
Arcadians,  the  Argives,  probably  all  the  original  inhabitants  of  Pelo- 
ponnesos, the  Ionians,  and  the  people  of  Attica  and  Thessaly. 

2  II.  ii.  604,  614.  »  ii.  v.  59_64. 
*  Xen.  Hell.  vii.  1.  23  ;LCramer,  iii.  299.         5  II.  ii.  610. 


80 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


Again,  the  Arcadians  were  commanded  by  Agapenor3 
the  son  of  Ankaios.  But  Ankaios  was  of  iEtolia. 
Ships  supplied  by  Agamemnon,2  and  a  chief  not  indi- 
genous, tend  to  mark  the  Arcadians  as  politically  sub- 
ordinate, therefore  as  Pelasgian. 

At  the  funeral  games  of  Amarunkeus  there  were 
present  Epeians,  Pulians,  and  iEtolians  ; 3  that  is  to 
say,  all  the  neighboring  tribes  except  the  Arcadians. 
Now  the  Homeric  indications  respecting  the  origin  of 
games,  in  a  marked  manner  tend  to  connect  them, 
as  we  shall  find,  with  sources  other  than  Pelasgic.4 

In  the  Seventh  Iliad,  Nestor  relates  that  in  his  youth 
the  Pulians  and  Arcadians  fought,  near  the  river  Iar- 
danos.  The  former  seem  to  have  been  victorious ; 
which  accords  with  the  military  inferiority  ofPelasgoi 
to  an  Hellenic  force.  Clearly,  when  Nestor  killed 
their  king  Ereuthalion,5  it  was  by  the  aid  of  Pallas ; 
and  Pallas,  we  shall  find,  is  always  a  Hellenising  deity 
against  Pelasgians.  The  Pulians,  as  we  have  seen,  are 
Achaian  in  a  special  degree. 

In  marked  accordance  with  this  indirect  testimony, 
the  later  tradition  places  Lucaon  son  of  Pelasgos  in 
Arcadia ;  represents  the  people  as  autochthonous  ;  and 
makes  the  district  compete  with  Argolis  for  having 
given  them  their  first  seat  in  Peloponnesos. 

We  have  here,  too,  some  aid  from  philology.  The 
Arcadians  called  themselves  IlQoaeX^voi,  which  is  com- 
monly rendered  4  anterior  to  the  moon.'  Now  it  is 
difficult  to  see  why  the  moon,  which  continually  waxes, 
wanes,  and  disappears,  should  be  selected  as  the  type 


i  II.  ii.  609 ;  xxiii.  630-635.  2  n.  ii.  612. 

3  II.  xxiii.  630-635.         4  gee  infra,  Chap.  V.         5  II.  vii.  154. 


THE  PELASGOI. 


81 


of  stability  and  longevity  among  natural  objects.  But 
if  we  refer  the  origin  of  the  word  to  tcqo  and  HeXlol  or 
JZdkhjveg,  then  it  becomes  the  appropriate  form  in 
which  the  Arcadian,  or  Pelasgian,  people  assert  their 
priority  in  the  Peloponnesos  to  the  Hellic  or  Sellic 
races. 

Until  very  late  in  the  historic  period,  the  Arcadians 
remained  an  undistinguished  people.  But  they  were 
the  Swiss  of  Greece ;  and  they  supplied  a  hardy 
soldiery  to  any  state  in  want  of  mercenary  assistance, 
without  reference  to  attachments  of  race  as  between 
Dorian  and  Ionian.  With  the  Lacedemonians  they  in- 
vaded Attica:  with  the  Thebans  they  invaded  Lace- 
daemon  : 1  in  the  great  siege  of  Syracuse,  one  con- 
tingent fought  by  the  side  of  the  invaders,  the  other 
along  with  the  besieged.2 

2.  The  Ionians  (Iaones)  are  but  once  mentioned  in 
Homer.  They  are  one  of  five  divisions  appointed,  in 
the  Thirteenth  Iliad,3  to  meet  the  attack  of  Hector, 
when  that  attack  is  destined  to  prevail.  The  others 
are  the  Locrians,  Phthians,  Epeians,  and  Boiotians. 
The  same  spirit  of  nationality,  which  prevents  Homer 
from  allowing  any  eminent  Greek  chieftain  to  be  slain 
or  wounded  in  fair  conflict  with  the  Trojans,  appar- 
ently leads  him  in  this  place  to  select,  (perhaps  with 
the  exception  of  the  Epeians,4)  some  of  the  less  dis- 
tinguished portions  of  the  army  to  resist  the  Trojans, 
on  an  occasion  when  the  resistance  is  to  be  ineffectual. 
The  Myrmidons  are  of  necessity  absent :  but  he  might 
have  placed  in  the  post  of  danger  those  troops  whom 

i  Xen.  Hell.  vii.  1.  23.  2  Thuc.  vii.  57.  3  v.  685. 

4  They  have  laudatory  epithets  in  II.  xi.  732  and  xiii.  686.  They 
were,  however,  worsted  by  the  men  of  Pulos. 

6 


82 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


he  pointedly  commends,  the  troops  of  Agamemnon,  or 
the  Abantes.1  Our  finding  the  Ionians  among  undis- 
tinguished contingents  tends  to  fix  upon  them  a  like 
character. 

Further,  they  are  called  iXxeprcoveg,2  men  with  long 
flowing  tunics.  As  Homer  has  nowhere  else  used  the 
epithet,  he  gives  us  no  direct  aid  in  illustrating  it. 
But  it  clearly  has  more  or  less  of  disparaging  effect, 
since  such  an  habiliment  is  ill-suited  for  military  pur- 
poses. And  it  is  in  direct  contrast  with  the  epithet 
d[utQo%ircovsg  of  the  valiant  Lukioi  or  Lycians,  whose 
short  and  spare  tunic  required  no  cincture  to  con- 
fine it. 

These  Ionians  were,  as  it  would  seem,  the  ruling 
class  of  the  Athenians,  the  'AOrpaiwv  ngoleleyfisvoi ; 3  or, 
it  may  be,  their  picked  men.  The  praise  awarded  to 
Menestheus  in  the  Catalogue,  even  if  the  passage  be 
genuine,  is  only  that  of  being  good,  to  use  a  modern 
phrase,  at  putting  his  men  into  line.4  The  Athenian 
soldiers,  indeed,  are  declared  in  II.  iv.  328,  to  be  val- 
iant, iirfitcoQzg  dvrijg ;  but  the  character  of  the  com- 
mander is  less  than  negative.  Though  of  kingly 
parentage,  he  nowhere  appears  among  the  governing 
spirits  of  the  army,  nor  is  he  called  one  of  the  kings, 
although  his  father  Peteos  had  enjoyed  the  title ; 5  and 
on  the  only  occasion  when  we  find  him  amid  the  clash 
of  arms,  namely,  when  the  brave  Lycians  are  threaten- 
ing the  part  of  the  rampart  committed  to  his  charge, 
he  shudders,  and  looks  about  him  for  aid.6  The  infe- 
riority extends  to  the  other  Athenian  chiefs,  Pheidas, 


i  II.  ii.  542,  577. 
4  II.  ii.  554. 


2  II.  xiii.  685. 
5  II.  iv.  338. 


3  II.  xiii.  689. 
6  II.  xii.  331. 


THE  PELASGOI. 


83 


Stichios,  Bias,  and  Iasos  ; 1  of  whom  all  are  undistin- 
guished, and  two,  Stichios  and  Iasos,  are  '  food  for 
powder,'  slain  by  Hector  and  ^Eneas  respectively. 
Here  then  there  seems  to  have  been  bravery  without 
qualities  for  command ;  and  all  this  tends  to  exhibit 
the  Athenians  as  in  a  marked  degree  Pelasgian  at  this 
epoch,  stout  but  passive,  without  any  of  the  ardor  or 
the  xuwg 2  of  the  Hellenic  character. 

Something  will  hereafter  be  added  to  this  evidence 
from  an  examination  of  the  etymology  of  names  in 
Homer.  < 

The  close  relation  between  Athene  and  Athens, 
however,  is  a  sign  that  seems  to  tell  in  the  opposite 
direction.  But  upon  examining  into  it,  we  perceive 
that  it  is  a  local  and  not  a  personal  relation.  Ever 
active  in  the  protection  or  guidance  of  Achilles,  Aga- 
memnon, Diomed,  Odysseus,  Athene  says  and  does 
nothing  whatever  in  the  War  for  any  Athenian.  Yet 
Athens  has  the  epithet  c  sacred,' 3  the  unfailing  mark 
in  Homer  of  special  relation  to  some  deity ;  and,  as 
far  as  Athene  has  any  favorite  place  of  earthly  resi- 
dence or  resort,  it  appears  to  be  Athens,  to  which, 
seemingly  as  matter  of  course,  she  repairs  from 
Scherie,4  in  the  Odyssey.  There  is  something  remark- 
able, and  not  easy  to  explain,  in  this  combination  of 
strong  local  connection  with  a  total  absence  of  personal 
care  and  patronage. 

It  is  to  be  borne  in  mind  that  Athene"  appears  to 
have  been  a  deity  of  universal  worship.5  She  was 
regularly  adored  by  the  Trojans,6  whom  she  labored  to 
ruin. 


i  II.  xiii.  691 ;  xv.  329, 332.         2  Od.  xi.  393.  3  Qd.  xi.  323. 

4  Od.  vii.  80.  5  Infra,  Chap.  VIII.   6  u,  yi<  300< 


84 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


On  both  the  occasions  when  Athens  is  placed  in 
direct  connection  with  the  goddess,  the  name  of  Erech- 
theus  is  introduced  :  in  the  Catalogue  he  is  stated  to 
have  been  nursed  by  Athene,  and  he  was  the  child 
of  Aroura.1  She  (probably  Athene)  set  him  in  Athens, 
in  her  (or  his)  rich  or  well-endowed  temple  (icp  m 
Ttlovi  v^co) . 

It  is  impossible  wholly  to  shake  off  the  apprehension 
of  forgery  in  dealing  with  this  passage,  which  falls 
short  in  the  grammatical  clearness  usually  so  notable 
in  Homer.  On  the  other  hand,  the  objections  which 
have  been  taken  to  it  seem  insufficient  to  condemn  it ; 
to  condemn  at  any  rate  the  part  of  it  I  have  cited, 
which  remarkably  corresponds  with  Od.  vii.  81 :  there 
she  enters  the  well-built  house  Qtvxivov  dopov')  of  Erech- 
theus. 

Erechtheus  appears  in  the  Catalogue  to  be  described 
as  an  autochthon  ;  and  therefore  probably  as  Pelasgian. 
The  wealthy  temple  may  perhaps  mean  a  temple  with 
a  rs'^vog  or  glebe  for  a  priest,  which  we  shall  find  to 
be  a  sign,  not  of  Hellenic,  but  of  Pelasgian  national- 
ity. On  the  whole,  we  cannot  ignore  the  existence  of 
Pelasgian  signs,  while  we  cannot  find  in  the  text  of 
Homer  any  full  explanation  of  the  fact  that  Athene  is 
the  eponymist  of  Athens. 

The  type  of  Athene,  however,  is  far  too  high  to  allow 
us  to  view  her  as  a  deity  merely  national.  She  is  not 
circumscribed  by  any  limits  either  of  blood  or  place. 
This  does  not  exclude  specialities  of  attachment ;  but 
her  special  attachment  to  the  Greeks  is  one  apparently 
having  reference  to  great  qualities  of  mind  and  char- 


i  II.  ii.  547-549. 


THE  PELASGOI. 


85 


acter.  The  Pelasgianism  of  the  Trojans  .does  not, 
before  the  great  quarrel,  cut  them  off  from  her.  She 
singularly  loved  Phereclos,  who  built  the  ships  of 
Paris ; 1  and  she  aided  the  Trojans  in  erecting  the 
rampart  which  sheltered  Heracles  from  the  pursuing 
monster.2 

There  is,  however,  very  powerful  evidence  outside 
the  text  of  Homer  to  show  the  strongly  Pelasgian 
character  of  Attica  in  early  times.  Her  subsequent 
greatness  was  evidently  connected  with  a  remarkable 
mixture  of  blood,  arising  from  her  having  been,  dur- 
ing long  periods,  a  place  of  refuge  for  fugitives,  and 
for  the  worsted  party  expelled  from  other  portions  of 
Greece . 

Thucydides3  states  that,  from  early  times,  Attica 
was  inhabited  by  one  and  the  same  race,  because  the 
poverty  of  the  soil  offered  no  temptations  to  an  invad- 
er. Hence  it  is,  without  doubt,  that  we  find  the 
Athenians  of  history  ever  claiming  the  character  of 
autochthons.  But  this  is  in  effect  to  call  them  Pelas- 
gians. 

Herodotus4  declares  the  Athenians  to  have  been 
Ionian,  and  the  Ionians  to  be  Pelasgian.  Having 
been  Pelasgians,  he  says,  the  Attican  people  became 
Hellenic,  apparently  by  the  reception  of  immigrants, 
and  by  a  gradual  amalgamation.  Evidently,  accord- 
ing to  this  historian,  the  change  did  not  take  place  by 
an  arrival  of  Ionians,  for  he  declares  that  which  Homer 
only  suggests,  that  the  Ionians  were  Pelasgian. 

Some  conflict,  however,  there  was,  apparently,  be- 
tween the  urban  and  the  rural  population.    The  Pe- 


i  II.  v.  59-61. 


2  II.  xx.  146. 


3  i.  2. 


*  i.  56. 


86 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


lasgians  complained,  said  Hecataeus,1  that  the  Athen- 
ians drove  them  from  the  soil,  which  they  had  im- 
proved in  such  a  degree  as  to  excite  envy.  The 
Athenians  alleged  that  their  children,  when  they  went 
forth  to  draw  water,  were  insulted  by  the  Pelasgians. 
The  Dorian  San,  Herodotus2  adds,  was  the  Ionian 
Sigma. 

Thucydides3  says  the  Athenians  were  the  first  among 
the  Greeks  to  lay  aside  the  custom  of  bearing  arms, 
and  to  cultivate  ease  and  luxury.  We  may  naturally 
connect  this  fact  with  the  undisturbed  condition  and 
pacific  habits  of  the  people  :  and  perhaps  it  is  partially 
indicated  by  the  word  elxexizcoveg,  'tunic-trailers,' 
already  cited. 

The  Hesiodic  tradition  of  Hellen  and  his  sons  does 
not  mention  Ion.  It  is  remarkable  that  Euripides 
does  not  represent  Ion  as  Hellenic,  but  as  the  adopted 
son  of  Xouthos,  the  real  son  of  Creusa,  an  Erechtheid  ; 
in  entire  conformity  with  what,  as  I  conceive,  the 
text  of  Homer  suggests. 

Peisistratos  and  his  family  claimed  a  Neleid,  that  is, 
a  non-Pelasgian  descent ;  recognizing  as  it  were  the 
difference  of  the  ruling  blood. 

According  to  Herodotus,4  there  remained  in  the 
Athens  of  history  a  portion  of  the  wall  called  Pelasgic, 
and  the  primitive  Athenians  were  called  Pelasgoi  Cra- 
naoi,  and  were  reputed  to  be  autochthonous. 

Eleusis,  in  Attica,  was  the  chief  seat  of  the  worship 
of  Demeter — a  deity,  as  we  shall  find,  of  eminently 
Pelasgian  character  and  associations. 


1  As  quoted  in  Herod,  vi.  137,  138. 
3  i.  6. 


2  i.  139. 

4  i.  56 ;  v.  64 ;  viii.  44. 


THE  PELASGOI. 


8T 


Strabo  declares  that  ancient  Attica  was  las,  with  an 
Ionian  people,  who  supplied  Asia  Minor  with  the  colo- 
nists of  the  Ionian  migration.1 

The  careful  researches  of  Dr.  Hahn  in  Albania  have 
accumulated  much  evidence  of  the  Pelasgian  charac- 
ter of  the  population.  It  includes  remarkable  coinci- 
dences with  the  institutions  of  Attica:  for  example, 
the  fourfold  division  of  the  tribes.2 

To  us  the  origin  of  the  Ionian  name  remains  in 
great  obscurity.  It  is  probably  related  to  the  Pelasgian 
stock.    It  certainly  appears  not  to  be  Hellenic. 

3.  In  the  Thessaly  of  the  Greek  Catalogue,  not  only 
does  the  paucity  of  tribal  names  leave  us  to  suppose 
that  the  population  of  the  districts  generally  had  not 
yet  distinctly  emerged  from  what  may  be  called  Pelas- 
gianism,  and  not  only  is  this  supposition  confirmed  by 
the  name  of  Pelasgic  Argos,  but  there  are  other  con- 
firmatory signs. 

One  of  them  is  the  worship  of  the  River  Spercheios  ; 3 
which,  though  offered  by  Achilles  for  a  special  purpose, 
was  also  practised  by  Peleus,  and  is  probably  due  to 
a  strong  local  tradition  of  a  Pelasgian  character.  His 
z8{iwog,  or  glebe,  also  connects  him  with  the  Pelas- 
gians.4 

Another  sign  is  the  rfyevog  or  sacred  glebe  of  De- 
meter  at  Purasos.5  Possibly  the  name  may  be  related 
to  Ttvgog,  wheat.  Apart  from  this,  the  associations  of 
Demeter  in  Homer  are  never  Hellenic.6     The  ap- 

1  Bk.  viii.  p.  333. 

2  Hahn,  'Albanesische  Studien/  Abschn.  ii.  pp.  43-46,  and  note  19, 
p.  130. 

3  II.  xxiii.  144.  4  See  infra,  Chap.  VII.  ;  also  p.  106. 
5  II.  ii.  696.  6  See  infra,  Chap.  VIII. 


'88 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


pearance  of  a  rs[j.Evog  in  this  case  is  also  a  Pelasgian 
sign. 

The  historical  growth  of  the  Graian1  (Greek)  name 
out  of  the  Greek  settlements  in  Italy  connects  it  with 
communities  highly  Pelasgian.  In  Homer  we  find 
that  name  only  in  Boiotia,  a  land  of  rich  cultivation, 
like  the  Italian  colonies.  But  Aristotle2  places  the 
Graicoi  in  the  ancient  Hellas,  a  portion  of  Thessaly, 
about  Dodona  and  the  Acheloos,  which,  he  says,  was 
inhabited  by  them  and  by  the  Selloi.  Thus  the  Graian 
name  serves  further  to  associate  Thessaly  with  the 
Pelasgoi. 

4.  The  name  Iasos  has  an  early  and  important 
place  in  the  Homeric  tradition. 

(a)  The  phrase  4  Iason  Argos,'  which  means  West- 
ern Peloponnesos,3  appears  to  indicate  a  dynasty,  or 
dominion,  of  an  Iasos  in  that  country. 

(F)  Demeter  (in  Crete,  according  to  Hesiod)  gives 
way  to  her  passion  for  Iasion,4  a  son  or  descendant  of 
Iasos,  in  a  tilled  field. 

(c)  Demetor  Iasides,  a  son,  or  rather  a  descendant, 
of  Iasos,  is  represented  by  the  pseud-Odysseus  as 
reigning  in  Cyprus5  at  the  period  of  his  return  to 
Ithaca,  and  as  being  in  xenial  relations  with  Egypt, 
the  people  of  which,  he  says,  made  a  present  of  him  to 
Demetor.  This  clearly  shows  that  there  had  been  an 
Iasid  dominion  in  Cyprus. 

(d)  Amphion  and  Zethos,  who  first  founded  and 

1  The  name  Graicos,  according  to  K.  0.  Miiller,  came  back  into 
use  with  the  Alexandrian  poets,  through  the  old  common  tongue  of 
Macedonia.  —  Miiller's  Orchomenos,  p.  119. 

2  Meteorol.  i.  14.  3  See  above,  Chap.  II.  p.  48. 
4  Od.  v.  125.                                5  Od.  xvii.  442. 


THE  PELASGOI. 


89 


.  walled  in  the  city  of  Thebes,  were  Iasids:1  Amphion 
at  one  time  (^ore)  reigned  in  Minyan  Orchomenos. 

(e)  Iasos,2  son  of  Sphelos  and  grandson  of  Boukolos, 
was  one  of  the  Athenian  commanders,  and  fell  by  the 
hand  of  iEneas  ;  this  too  without  any  commemoration  : 
from  both  which  circumstances  we  perceive  that  he 
was  in  no  great  esteem,  and  was  most  probably  not  of 
Hellenic,  but  of  Pelasgian  blood. 

The  attachment  of  Demeter  to  Crete  was  plainly 
connected  with  the  Pelasgian  period.  The  secondary 
place  given  to  Iasos  in  the  war,  and  the  etymology  of 
the  names  of  his  ancestry,  seem  to  establish  his  Pe- 
lasgian extraction.  If  Amphion  and  Zethos  were,  as 
it  appears  probable,  displaced  from  Boeotia  by  Kadmos 
and  the  Phoenicians,  they  were  probably  of  a  Pelasgian 
family :  and  indeed  it  would  be  very  difficult  to  give 
evidence  of  any  Hellenic  race  or  family  at  their  epoch, 
which  is  between  four  and  five  generations  before  the 
Troica.  Lastly,  Cyprus,  distant  as  it  was  from 
Greece,  was  evidently  in  some  position  of  qualified 
subordination  to  its  ruling  house ;  because,  when  the 
expedition  to  Troy  was  meditated,  Kinures,3  its  ruler, 
sent  a  beautiful  gift  to  Agamemnon,  probably  more  as 
an  apology  for  non-appearance,  than  as  a  disinterested 
token  of  good-will. 

All  the  several  indications  then  converge  upon  this 
point,  that  the  name  of  Iasos  appears  to  bear  no  Hel- 
lenic character.  It  has  certain  points  of  contact  at 
least  with  some  of  the  races  that  dwelt  in  Egypt ;  and 
likewise  with  Phoenicia  through  the  city  of  Thebes, 
and  through  the  indubitable  presence  of  a  Phoenician 


i  Od.  xi.  262,  283. 


2  II.  xv.  337. 


3  II.  xi.  19-23. 


90 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


influence  in  Cyprus.  Anterior  to,  and  apparently  reach- 
ing beyond  the  Hellenic  name,  its  most  marked  asso- 
ciations appear  to  be  Pelasgian. 

5.  There  are  abundant  marks  of  a  Pelasgian  charac- 
ter in  the  population  of  Crete. 

We  know  that  the  ruling  family  in  Crete  was  Phoe- 
nician ;  but  the  wealth  of  the  hundred-citied  island 1 
was  just  what  might  be  expected  to  arise  from  the 
early  combination  of  Phoenician  enterprise  with  Pelas- 
gian industry. 

There  were  many  races  in  Crete,  and  there  was  a 
mixture  of  tongue.2  This  appears  to  indicate  the 
presence  of  the  Phoenician  element  in  considerable 
force  with  its  Semitic  form  of  speech,  as  we  have  no 
reason  to  suppose,  among  the  races  actually  named, 
any  radical  difference  of  language.  In  this  passage 
the  speaker  is  addressing  Penelope,  and  it  is  in  accord- 
ance with  the  uniform  usage,  of  the  Poems,  that  he 
should  mention  only  races  which  had  been  domesticated 
in  Greece. 

Those  races  are,  1.  Achaioi,  2.  Eteocretes, 
3.  Kudones,  4.  Dorieis,  5.  Pelasgoi.  Of  these, 
the  first  and  fourth  may  at  once  be  classed  as  Hellenic. 
With  respect  to  the  Eteocretes,  we  may  most  nat- 
urally suppose  them  to  have  been  part  of  the  Pelasgian 
family,  whose  date  of  arrival  was  more  remote,  in  rela- 
tion to  whom  all  the  other  races  had  thus  been 
strangers,  and  to  whom  therefore  is  given  a  name  that 
is  the  equivalent  of  autochthons.  The  Kudones  ap- 
pear to  be  of  similar  origin.  They  lived  on  a  Cretan 
river  Iardanos.3    This  was  the  name  of  the  river  in 


1  II.  ii.  649.    In  Od.  xix.  174,  ninety. 

2  Od.  xix.  175. 


3  Od.  iii."  292. 


THE  PELASGOI. 


91 


Peloponnesos,  on  the  banks  of  which  the  Pulians 
fought  the  Arcadians.  The  battle,1  as  being  one  be- 
tween Achaians  and  Pelasgians,  was  probably  on  Arca- 
dian ground  ;  and  the  name  of  rapid  Keladon,  given 
to  the  stream,  also  shows  that  it  was  on  the  high 
land. 

This  Pelasgian  population,  with  its  less  warlike,  pos- 
sibly  also  less  energetic,  habits,  appears  to  have  sunk 
at  a  later  period  into  servitude.  According  to  Ephorus, 
as  quoted  by  Athenseus,2  there  were  in  Crete  festivals 
of  the  slave  population,  during  which  freemen  were 
not  permitted  to  come  within  the  town  walls,  while  the 
slaves  were  supreme,  and  were  competent  to  flog  the 
free.  These  festivals  were  held  in  Kudonia,  the  city 
of  the  Kudones. 

Fifthly,  the  name  of  Pelasgoi  speaks  for  itself. 

6.  The  Leleges  have  a  place  on  the  Trojan  side, 
apparently  more  important  than  that  of  the  Kaukones. 
They  appear,  with  the  Kaukones  and  Pelasgoi,3  as 
part  of  the  force  which  was  encamped  upon  the  plain 
during  the  period  when  the  Greeks  were  shut  up  within 
their  entrenchment.  Priam  had  for  one  of  his  wives 
Laothoe,  daughter  of  their  king  Altes.4  He  calls  them 
lovers  of  battle.  ^Eneas  says  5  that  Pallas  6  incited 
Achilles  to  make  havoc  of  Trojans  and  Leleges.' 
Homer  can  hardly  mean,  under  the  name  of  Leleges, 
to  speak  of  the  whole  body  of  allies,  which  included 
both  Pelasgians  and  his  favorite  Lycians.  The  name 
may  be  one  covering  some  of  the  allied  contingents ; 
or  it  may  signify  the  fourth  and  fifth  divisions  of  the 


i  II.  vii.  134;  xi.  735-752(7). 

3  II.  x.  429.  4  II.  xxi.  85. 


2'vi.  p.  263. 
5  II.  xx.  96. 


92 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


Trojan  army,  which  appear  in  the  Catalogue  1  without 
any  national  or  tribal  designation,  immediately  before 
the  Pelasgoi  and  the  rest  of  the  allies. 

We  have  abundant  instances  in  Homer  of  double 
names  attaching  to  the  same  population.  The  people 
of  Elis  are  Eleioi  and  Epeioi.  The  Dolopians  are 
included  under  the  Phthians  ;  perhaps  under  Achaians 
and  Hellenes.2  Five  races  in  particular  are  named  as 
inhabiting  Crete ;  but  all,  possibly  with  others,  are 
included  in  the  Cretes3  of  the  Second  Iliad.  The 
Ionian  name,  with  that  of  the  Kaukones,  and  of  Le- 
leges,  not  to  speak  of  the  Temnikes,  Aones,  Huantes, 
Telebooi,  of  whom  we  do  not  hear  in  Homer,  are  most 
probably  subdivisions  of  the  great  Pelasgian  category. 
On  the  whole,  it  seems  safest  to  adopt  the  conclusion 
of  Bishop  Thirlwall,  that  in  all  likelihood  '  the  name 
Pelasgians  was  a  general  one,  like  that  of  Saxons, 
Franks,  or  Alemanni ;  but  that  each  of  the  Pelasgian 
tribes  had  also  one  peculiar  to  itself.' 4  The  evidence 
directly  deducible  from  Homer  tends  to  this  conclusion  ; 
and  it  is  powerfully  sustained,  as  we  shall  see,  by  more 
copious  indirect  testimony. 

The  work  of  Dr.  Hahn  affords  ample  evidence  of 
their  occupation  of  Epiros,  which  was  also  recognized 
by  the  tradition  of  the  ancients.5 

The  belief  that  the  Pelasgoi  were  the  original  inhab- 
itants of  Greece,  appears  to  be  held  undoubtingly  by 
the  modern  Greeks,  if  we  may  trust  the  recent  work  of 
Petrides6  upon  the  ancient  history  of  his  country. 

i  II.  ii.  828-839.  2  n.  ii.  683  ;  ix.  484 ;  xvi.  186. 

3  Od.  xix.  175  ;  II.  ii.  645.  4  History  of  Greece,  vol.  i.  ch.  ii. 

5  Strabo,  bk.  v.  p.  221.  Leake's  Travels  in  Northern  Greece,  vol. 
iv.  p.  174.  6  Chap.  i.  pp.  2,  3  (Corfu,  1830). 


THE  PELASGOI. 


98 


We  are  in  no  way  obliged  to  suppose  that  tribes  of 
so  wide  a  diffusion  came  into  Greece  by  a  single  route. 
The  prevailing  opinion 1  of  the  ancient  writers  was 
that  their  first  seat  was  in  the  Peloponnesos.  Homer 
gives  abundant  signs  of  them  in  Thessaly,  but  also  in 
Crete  and  in  Cyprus.  It  seems  probable  that  they  may 
have  arrived  both  by  the  landward  route  of  the  Thra- 
cian  coast,  and  by  the  stepping-stones,  so  to  speak, 
which  the  southern  islands  afforded  them. 

If  there  has  been  presented  reasonable  ground  for 
the  conclusion  that  the  Pelasgians  formed  the  base  of 
the  Greek  nation,  it  is  interesting  to  observe,  by  the 
light  of  history,  how  the  most  durable  vitality  of  a  peo- 
ple resides  in  the  mass,  while  the  energies  of  mere 
class,  or  of  any  branch  socially  separate  from  the  trunk, 
are  liable  to  exhaustion  if  they  are  not  refreshed  by 
popular  contact ;  as  water  taken  from  the  sea  grows 
foul,  while  the  sea  itself  is  ever  fresh.  The  astute 
Aiolid,  the  high-souled  and  fiery  Achaian,  the  Dorian 
with  his  iron  will  and  unconquerable  tenacity  —  each 
for  a  time  enjoys  ascendancy  and  disappears ;  and  the 
districts  which  successively  attain  to  military  pre-emir 
nence  in  the  later  historic  ages,  are  Bceotia,  Macedonia, 
Arcadia,  Epiros,  none  of  which  had  been  the  early 
depositories  of  powerful  Hellenic  influences.  Lastly, 
Achaia  emerged  into  a  late  celebrity.  It  is  probable 
that  we  ought  to  consider  this  name,  not  so  much  in 
connection  with  the  old  and  famous  Achaian  race,  as 
with  the  party  worsted  in  the  great  Dorian  conquest : 
and  if  this  be  so,  we  shall  be  safe  in  concluding  that,  in 
all  likelihood,  the  province  had  retained  throughout  a 
dominant  Pelasgian  character. 

1  Cramer's  Greece,  i.  17. 


94 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


The  etymology  of  the  Pelasgian  name  has  been  long 
and  variously  discussed  without  any  conclusive  issue. 
Some  draw  it  from  Peleg  of  the  tenth  chapter  of  Gen- 
esis, a  name  said  to  mean  4  partition,'  that  is,  of  the 
earth  :  this  opinion  is  questioned  by  Marsh,1  and  re- 
jected by  Clinton.2  Again,  it  has  been  derived  from 
pelargoi,  the  Greek  name  for  storks.  This,  accord- 
ing to  some,  because  the  Pelasgians  were  wanderers, 
and  the  stork  is  migratory.  But  the  periodical  move- 
ment of  the  stork  seems  to  have  no  great  correspond- 
ence with  an  irregularly  roving  habit  in  a  people. 
Aristophanes 8  appears  undoubtedly  to  make  the  name 
of  storks  a  vehicle  for  a  jest  on  the  Pelasgian  origin  of 
the  Athenians.  Another  plea  seems  to  me  more  plausi- 
ble. The  stork  is  a  social  bird :  in  the  East  it  settles 
on  the  roofs  of  houses  ;  it  freely  follows  the  ploughman 
along  his  furrow ;  and  its  habits  thus,  in  both  points, 
supply  links  of  association  with  the  first  appearance  of 
a  people  of  husbandmen.  The  stork  was  one  of  the 
sacred  birds  of  the  Egyptians. 

Some  have  derived  the  name  from  pelagos,  a  word 
used  in  Greek  for  the  sea.  And  this,  either  because 
the  Pelasgians  came  by  sea,  or  because  they  came  from 
beyond  sea.  It  seems  doubtful,  however,  whether 
'  sea '  was  the  proper  or  only  the  second  meaning  of 
pelagos.  We  have  the  phrases,  alog  h  Tzsldyeaai 
(Homer),  nbvnov  mlayog  (Pindar),  alg  nelayla  (iEs- 
chylus),  mlayog  Oaldcaijg  ( Apollonius) ,  all  of  which 
seem  to  show  that  pelagos,  like  aequor,  may  mean  '  a 
plain,'  and  may  thus  come  to  mean  the  expanse  or 
level  of  the  sea.    Strabo  tells  us  of  a  people  called 

1  Horse  Pelasg.  c.  i.  sub  fin.  2  Fasti  Hellenici,  i.  97. 

3  Aves,  1354. 


THE  PELASGOI. 


95 


Pelagones  in  Macedonia,  and  in  Homer  we  find  the 
names  Pelagon  and  Pelegon.  Hesychius  renders  the 
word  mlayog  as  meaning  greatness  or  depth,  or 
the  breadth  of  the  sea.  If  the  name  of  Pelasgoi  be 
related  to  the  word  pel  ago  s,  it  may  be  either  because 
they  were  great  and  numerous,  or  because  they  were 
settlers  upon  plains.  So  Threx,  its  counterpart,  akin 
to  TQrtfvg,  meant  the  inhabitant  of  a  rough  or  rocky 
place,  a  mountaineer.1 

Of  the  signs  of  a  difference  of  race  among  the  Greek 
population  more  or  less  in  correspondence  with  a  dif- 
ference of  ranks,  some  have  been  exhibited  in  the  ex- 
amination of  the  Achaian  name,  which  appears  properly 
to  have  designated  an  aristocracy  formed  from  a  con- 
quering or  dominant  race,  and  placed  amid  a  popula- 
tion of  distinct  and  less  aspiring  blood. 

Yet  the  difference  must  not  be  overstated.  By  com- 
mon consent  we  are  dealing  with  different  branches 
from  the  Aryan  stem :  and  the  distinction  of  Hellic 
and  Pelasgic  finds  a  correlative  classification  in  the 
Italian  races,  where  the  Oscans  hold  the  place  of  the 
Helloi.  It  is  represented  indeed  in  our  country  by 
the  distinction  among  Normans,  Scandinavians,  Saxons 
(or  the  group  of  tribes  collectively  so  called  with  no 
great  propriety),  and  Celts  ;  though  it  may  be  more  or 
less  doubtful  at  which  point  of  division  we  should 
draw  the  line  among  these  several  races. 

I  shall  endeavor  to  show  that  the  Trojan  War  may 
in  some  sense  be  considered  as  the  conflict  of  Hellic 
with  Pelasgic  elements.    But  it  is  remarkable,  1.  that 

1  K.  0.  Miiller  (Orchomenos,  p.  119),  assuming  Pelasgos  to  be 
identical  with  Pelargos,  derives  the  word  from  tceIu,  '  to  be/  '  to  be 
wont  to  be/  and  so  *  to  frequent '  or  '  inhabit/  together  with  "Apjog. 


96 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


Homer  nowhere  represents  the  Trojans  as  speaking  a 
tongue  different  from  that  of  the  Greeks ;  2.  that  the 
Trojan  soldiery  are  nowhere  represented  as  generally 
inferior  to  the  Greek  force  ;  it  is  the  superiority  of  the 
chiefs  which  determines  the  fate  of  battle  throughout 
the  Poems. 

With  respect  indeed  to  tongue,  Homer  tells  us  that 
the  Trojan  public  called  the  son  of  Hector  by  the  name 
of  Astuanax,  which  is  of  Greek  etymology  ;  and  we 
have  in  Troas 1  examples  of  that  double  nomenclature 
which  is  commonly  interpreted  as  referring  to  the 
epochs  of  two  different  nationalities,  the  second  of 
them  corresponding,  for  all  we  know,  with  the  con- 
temporary Greek  tongue,  though  we  are  made  aware 
that  a  variety  of  languages  were  spoken  among  the 
allies  of  Troy.2  A  long  list  of  names,  common  to 
Greek  and  Trojan  personages,  may  be  drawn  out  from 
the  Poems. 

But  while  we  greatly  lack  positive  information  in  the 
case  of  Troas,  we  possess  it  in  the  case  of  Italy.  Care 
indeed  must  be  taken  to  exclude  from  any  comparison 
those  words  which  were  transported  bodily  out  of  the 
Greek  into  the  Latin  tongue  after  literary  communion 
had  begun,  and  according  to  the  practice  which  Hor- 
ace 3  has  described  and  recommended. 

Niebuhr  4  laid  down  these  propositions,  which  appear 
to  be  reasonable. 

1.  That  the  words  truly  common  to  the  Greek  and 
Latin  languages  are  Pelasgian : 

2.  That  they  chiefly  relate  to  tillage  and  to  peaceful 
life: 

i  II.  ii.  813  ;  xx.  74.  2  n.  iv.  438  ;  x.  420. 

3  De  Arte  Poet.  53. 
4  Hare  and  Thirlwall's  Transl.  vol.  i.  p.  65. 


THE  PELASGOI. 


97 


3.  That,  accordingly,  the  Pelasgians  were  given  to 
peace  and  to  husbandry  : 

4.  Conversely,  that  the  words  in  which  the  two 
tongues  differ  are  due  to  another  race,  and  indicate 
its  pursuits. 

Speaking  generally,  those  words  of  the  Latin  and 
Greek  which  most  closely  correspond,  are 

1.  First  elements  of  the  structure  of  a  language, 
such  as  pronouns,  prepositions,  numerals. 

2.  Words  relating  to  the  commonest  objects  of  per- 
ception, and  the  primary  wants  of  life,  and  forms  of 
labor. 

Under  the  second  head  the  following  lists  are  pre- 
sented, by  way  not  of  exhaustion,  but  of  example. 

I.    OBJECTS  OF  INANIMATE  NATURE. 


arjp   aer  vetyog   nebula 

aidrjp   aether  vi<pog  .    .    .  nix 

akg,  dakaaaa    .    .  salum  vvtj   nox 

avrpov    ....  antrum  tcevkt]     .    .    .    .  pix 

aarrjp     ....  astrum  notog   polus 

avpa   aura  novrog    ....  pontus 

Aiog  (Zevg) .    .    .  dies  (tiyog   frigus 

dpooog    ....  ros  ce'krjvrj   ....  luna 

cap   ver  GKOTcelog     .    .    .  scopulus 

eviavTog,  rjvig   .    .  annus  oneog,  Gitrfkaiov    .  spelunca 

Ipa   terra  vdop   sudor 

EGirepog  ....  vesper  t    ,  C  fluvius 

rfkiog   sol  verog ....  ^  phivius 

noVkov    ....  coelum  rjlrj   sylva 

Mag  .    .    .  •  .    ,  lapis  (j>vKog   fucus 

TiaKKog )  ^vKkov    ....  folium 

r  \f\  ("Ml  S 

"kdxvg  $     •    •    •  £a/zai   humus 

Ievgou  .    .     >  x£lf*uv    ....  hyems 

TiVKrj  in  ?iVKcc6ag  $  '  upi]   hora 

(jiTjv   niensis 

7 


98 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


II.    TEEES,  PLANTS. 

lov  viola  <j)7]yog     ....  fagus 

fiodov  rosa 

III.    Or  ANIMATED  NATURE. 

akCdixt]^  ....    vulpes  tcvuv,  nvvog  .    .    .  canis 

afxvog  agnus  teov   leo 

(3oiig  bos  IvKog .    ....  lupis 

eyx&vg  ....    anguilla  big     .....  ovis 

drjp    .    .    .    .    .    fera  ovdap   uber 

innog  equus  nuTtog    \    .    .    .  pullus 

ixdvg  piscis  ravpog    ....  taurus 

Kanpog   ....    aper  iig   sus 

KpCog  aries  ojKvnrepog  .    .    .  accipiter 

IV.    OBJECTS  CONNECTED  WITH  FOOD. 

ufnrslog  .    .    ...    pampinus        fiefa   mel 

yaka,  yakanrog  >  m  fj.rj?.ovj    ....  malum 

ylayog    .    .      \'    lac>  lactlS         olvog   vinum 

da'tg  dapes  olrog   cibus 

tkata     ....    olea  gvkov    ficus 

elaiov    .    .    .    .    oleum  rpvyr)     ....  fruges 

KaXajxog  ....    calamus  a-rpvyerog  .    .    .  triticum 

KOLV7]  coena  &6v   .....  ovum 

Kpeag  caro 

V.    RELATED  TO  OUTDOOR  LABOR. 

uypog  ager  £evyog  > 

aporpov  ....    aratrum  fyyov  )      '    '    *  JuSum 

apovpa    .....    arvum  nr/nog,  orjnog    .    .  sepes 

bpxa-Tog  ....  hortus 

VI.  NAVIGATION. 

aynvpa   ....    ancora  lifirjv   limen 

epsT/xov  ....    remus  vavg   navis 

Kv(3epv7}Trjg  .    .    .    gubernator       irovg   pes 


THE  PELASGOI. 


VII.  DWELLINGS. 

aidahj    ....    favilla  dvpcu  fores 

avlrj  aula  Klrjig  clavis 

66/j.oc  domus  tex°C  lectus 

edog  sedes  oUog  vicus 

Qakay.oq  ....  thalamus 

VIII.  CLOTHING. 

eadrjg  vestis  xkdiva  ....  laena 

IX.    THE  HUMAN  BODY. 

yovv  genu  pypbg .    .    .    .    .  femur 

SekvvfiL  ....    digitus  [ivekog    ....  medulla 

e/Uof  ulcus  odovg  dens 

evrepov  ....    venter  oareov    .    .    .    .    os  (ossis) 

rjTzap  jecur  TraMftrj  ....  palma 

napdirj  }  -ixzCp,  (comp.)  ) 

Kiap    J-              cor  no{)g  £  .   pes,  pedis 

KEfyalr]    ....    caput  ulevr)    ....  ulna 

KdfjiTj  coma  cofiog  armus 

Aa£  calx  oxip  os  (oris) 

XanTco    ....  labrum 

X.    THE  FAMILY. 

yevog  gens,  genus  <j>pf/T7}p  > 

sKvpog    ....    socer  <ppr]Tpr)  $     ■    •  • 

tiVfyp     ....    mater  XVPV,  > 

,   >  heres 

ixarrip     ....    pater  XVPUGTVS  >  '  ' 

viog   .    .    .    .    .  filius 

XI.  SOCIETY. 

elevdepog    .    .    .    liber     ,  ,  <  tectum 

ira21oKLC    .    .    .    pellex  reKTov  (CTsyu)    .  ^  te^Q 

fie&  (pe^o)  .    .    .    rex  <j>6p  fur 

XII.   GENEEAL  IDEAS. 

aluv  .....    sevum  hf/dy  } 

v~                        !  .->....  letum 

alyog     ....    algor  A??™  ^ 


100 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


uveuog    ....  animus  fievog   mens 

av6rj   audio  (i6pog   mors 

fltog   vita  ftop<prj   forma 

(SioTog    ....  victus  vevu   numen 

yevo,  yevoo     .    .  gustus  voog   nosco 

Soaig   dos  odftr/   odor 

dupov     ....  donum  bdvvr)   odium 

eldo   video  bvofia   nomen 

deog   deus  ^(o<iri   Roma,  robur 

diyyavu  ....  tango  vitvog   somnus 

6v(iog   fumus  Qarig,  Qarov     .    .  fatum 

lg   vis  (j>fi[M)   fama 

Kviocrj    ....  nidor  Qvyq,  <j>v&  .    .    .  fuga 

XIII.   ADJECTIVES  OP  COMMON  USE. 

aynog .    .    .    .    .  uncus  fieyag   magnus 

uXkog   alius  fidcov  .....  minor 

ftpadvg,  (3ap6vg .    .  tardus  veog   novus 

(3paxvg    ....  brevis  okog   solus 

yevvalog  ....  gnavus  opdog   ordo 

ypavg   gravis  (  parvus 

iravpog    ...  < 

yvpog   curvus  r  ( paucus 

deijiog   dexter  naxvg     ....  pinguis 

epvdpog   ....  ruber,  rufus      mnpog    ....  acris 

7]6vg   suavis  Ttkarvg   ....  latus 

Kvprog    ....  curvus  irteog   plenus 

lelog   lasvis  rcvppog    ....  furvus 

leirrog  >  i  lentus  reprjv   tener 

liyvg   y      '    '      I  levis  imnog    ....  supinus 

fiaccuv  ....  major  #aof   cavus 


For  such  a  people  as  we  have  supposed  the  Pelas- 
gians  to  be,  here  is  no  inconsiderable  equipment  of 
words.    But  there  are  exceptions. 

1.  In  regard  to  religion,  the  stock  is  scanty.  We 
have  deus  related  to  deog,  numen  to  vsva,  rex  to  qeXoo, 
in  virtue  probably  of  the  sacrificial  office  of  a  primitive 
king:  and  we  may  add,  as  correlatives,  loi^  to  libo, 
and  aQaopai,  aqrpriQ  to  ara,  or  are,  orator.   But  this  is 


THE  PELASGOI. 


101 


little  :  and  there  is  a  great  lack  of  correspondence  in 
the  principal  words,  such  as,  on  the  Greek  side,  tagog, 
ayiog,  dvco,  fiafAog,  vtjog,  ayalpa,  rspsvog,  ev^Ofxai,  and  on  the 
other,  sacer,  sanctus,  pius,  templum,  preces, 
vates,  mac  to,  mo  la.  In  one  case,  or  in  both,  there 
must  have  been  a  great  displacement  of  the  Pelasgic 
vocabulary.  And  as  the  Roman  religion  was  far  more 
Pelasgian  than  the  Greek,  it  is  probable  that  this  dis- 
placement, if  it  occurred  in  one  only  of  the  two  penin- 
sulas, occurred  in  Greece. 

2.  The  words  relating  to  war  are  almost  without 
exception  irreducible  to  agreement. 


atxftrj .    .  . 

"kpriq .  .  . 
up[ia,  ditypog , 

aamg,  oanog 

fielog  .  . 
ftiog,  rotjov 
dopv,  syxog 
dtjpj}^ .  . 


cuspis 

Kkialai    .    .  . 

castra 

mucro 

Kvrjfiig    .    .  . 

.  ocrea 

acies 

Koleog     .    .  . 

.  vagina 

Mars 

icvulog    .    .  . 

.  rota 

currus 

Kvverj  .... 

.  galea 

rheda 

fiaxv,  vGfiivT]  . 

<  pugna 

scutum 

\  proelium 

clypeus 

bioTog,  log    .  . 

sagitta 

telum 

TToleuog  .    .  . 

.  bellum 

arcus 

jivfidg  .... 

.  temo 

hasta 

oaXmyt;  .    .  . 

{  tuba 

lorica 

\  classicum 

tabernaculum 

tyaoyavov,  tjtyog 

.  ensis 

Here  the  most  striking  correspondence  is  that  of 
Ares  with  Mars,  both  used  to  signify  war  itself,  as  well 
as  to  mean  the  god  of  war.  But  Ares,  though  he  is 
not  easy  to  trace,  appears  to  be  a  deity  whose  origin 
would  assign  him  exclusively  neither  to  the  Pelasgian 
nor  to  the  Hellenic  family.2    The  relationship  of  fielog 

' 1  Caesar,  De  Bell.  Civil,  b.  iii.  c.  96. 
2  See  infra,  Chap.  VIII. 


102 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


to  telum  appears  clear  enough.  Except  a  rather  faint 
similarity  of  Ttolsfxog  to  be  Hum,  and  of  OwqijS,  to  lorica, 
there  is  no  apparent  connection  between  any  other 
*  words  in  the  list. 

It  is  also  worth  observing  that,  while  the  Greeks  de- 
rive the  important  ethical  words  fieltegog,  better,  from 
fiikoQ,  and  agiawg,  best,  from  a^qg,  the  Latins  are  con- 
tent with  optimus,  obtained  from  a  common  root  with 
opes,  wealth ;  possibly,  however,  as  we,  not  much  to 
our  honor,  say  that  one  man  is  worth  more  than 
another. 

With  respect  to  the  terms  belonging  to  navigation, 
it  is  remarkable  how  they  bear  upon  rowing,  its 
rudest  form,  and  do  not  include  the  names  for  mast, 
yard,  or  sail. 

Again,  the  use  of  metals  is  slight  in  the  earliest 
stage  of  society.  Even  with  the  Greeks  of  Homer 
only  one,  %alxog,  or  copper,  was  at  all  common ; 
and  we  may  observe  a  great  want  of  correspondence 
between  the  Greek  and  the  Roman  names  for  these 
invaluable  commodities. 

1.  xPva°C    '    -    •    aurum  4.  cidrjpog   .    .    .  ferrum 

2.  apyvpog  .    .    .    argentum        5.  naoafrepog  .    .  stannum 

3.  ^a/l/cof    .    .    .    ses  6.  /x61i{3og,  (jiolvfidog  plumbus 

The  Greek  dovlog,  again,  is  in  marked  contrast  with  the 
Latin  servus.  We  might  on  the  whole  plausibly  sup- 
pose that  slavery  was  not  a  Pelasgian  institution  at 
the  time  when  the  Greek  and  Italian  branches  of  the 
race  parted  company.  War  and  maritime  adventure 
were  the  chief  feeders  of  that  institution  ;  and  the 
Pelasgians,  as  we  see,  were  not  of  themselves  addicted 
to  either,  however  good  the  materials  they  afforded  for 
soldiery. 


THE  PELASGOI. 


103 


Nearly  all  those  Greek  words  which  are  in  close 
affinity  with  the  Latin  are  found  in  Homer. 

It  seems,  then,  in  sum,  that  the  Pelasgian  tongue 
supplied  both  peninsulas  with  most  of  the  words  re- 
lating to  the  primary  experience,  and  to  the  elementary 
wants  and  productions,  of  life  ;  but  not  with  those  of 
a  more  arduous  range,  such  as  war,  art,  policy,  and 
song.  And  the  religious  vocabulary  of  the  Greeks  was 
probably  supplied  from  Hellenic  sources. 

There  is  also  a  very  traceable  distinction  in  the 
names  of  persons  throughout  the  Iliad.  I  am  far  from 
contending,  that  we  are  to  suppose  them  to  be  in  gen- 
eral authentic.  But  the  elements,  out  of  which  Homer 
has  constructed  them,  will  indicate  a  marked  differ- 
ence of  character  and  pursuits.  Homer  gives  his 
Phaiakes  names  generally  connected  with  nautical 
habits,  in  accordance  with  his  picture  of  the  people. 
It  is  probable  that  he  proceeds  on  a  similar  principle 
in  other  cases.  The  evidence  which  names,  analyzed 
according  to  this  hypothesis,  will  supply,  tends  to  show 
the  strength  of  the  Pelasgian  element  —  1.  among  the 
Trojans  ;  2.  in  the  inferior  class  of  Greeks  ;  3.  par- 
ticularly in  certain  portions  of  Greece  ;  while  4.  the 
Lycian  names,  though  on  the  Trojan  side,  appear  to 
fall  into  an  opposite  class. 

The  test  of  a  Pelasgian  leaning  in  the  names  I  sup- 
pose to  be  their  connection  with  rural,  pacific,  or  in- 
dustrious habits,  and  the  like.  The  opposite  class 
express  ideas  belonging  to  glory,  policy,  mental  pow- 
ers, martial  vigor  and  operations. 

We  must  not  apply  the  rule  too  closely  to  slaves : 
such  as  Eumaios,  Eurucleia,  Eurumedousa,  Alkippe ; 


104 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


for  high-born  slaves  were  frequently  obtained  by  policy 
and  by  the  chances  of  war.1 

It  is  also  to  be  observed  that  the  names  etymologi- 
cally  related  to  the  horse  are  almost  exclusively  on  the 
Trojan  side.  Such  are  Hippasos,  Hippothoos,  Hippo- 
lochos  (Lycian),  Hippodamas,  Hippodamos,  Hippocoon, 
Hippomachos,  Hippotion,  Melanippos,  Euippos,  Eche- 
polos.  Hippodamos,  too,  will  be  remembered  as  one 
of  the  stock  or  staple  epithets  of  Hector.  On  the  other 
side  I  have  only  noticed  Hipponoos.2  In  Homer,  the 
horse-feeding  country  is  the  plain  country.3  And 
Thessaly  had  already  begun  to  obtain  the  pre-eminence 
in  its  breed  of  horses,  which  distinguished  it  in  the 
historic  period ;  for  the  two  best  teams  £  by  far,' 4  in 
the  Greek  army,  were  Thessalian.  This  may  perhaps 
be  the  link  of  association  between  the  horse  and  our 
Pelasgian  lowlanders. 

Again,  the  names  connected  with  gates  are  generally 
of  the  Trojan  party.  There  are  Pulaios,  Pulon,  Pu- 
lartes,  and  Pulaimenes.  Of  the  Greeks  we  have  Euru- 
pulos.  But  all  these  appear  to  be  the  names  of  leaders 
or  prominent  personages. 

Among  Attic  names  we  find  Pheidas,  Stichios,  Sphe- 
los,  Boucolos.  These  names  belong  to  prominent  per- 
sonages. But  an  etymology  relating  to  such  ideas  as 
parsimony  and  tillage  is  such  as  we  do  not  find  among 
the  Hellenic  races  in  a  corresponding  rank. 

Among  Trojans  slain,  without  much  note  of  distinc- 
tion, we  find  Amphiteros,  Echios,  Puris,  Polumelos, 
Argeas  (compare  Argeioi),  Dresos,  Opheltios,  Bouco- 


l  Od.  xv.  413. 
3  Od.  iii.  263. 


2  II.  xi.  303. 
4  II.  ii.  763,  770. 


THE  PELASGOI. 


105 


lion,  Melanthios  (compare  Melanthios  and  Melantho 
of  the  Odyssey,  both  servants).  Many  of  the  names 
accompanying  these  are  of  doubtful  etymology :  com- 
paratively few  relate  to  high  qualities  or  pursuits. 

In  the  Eleventh  Iliad,  Hector  slays  in  a  mass  nine 
persons,1  who  are  called  fysjioysg,  or  leaders,  as  opposed 
to  the  nlrjdvg  or  common  soldiery.  But  as  none  of 
these  are  anywhere  else  even  mentioned,  and  as  Homer 
never  allows  Greeks  really  distinguished  to  fall  whole- 
sale by  the  Trojan  sword  or  spear,  we  cannot  render 
this  as  meaning  more  than  that  they  were  officers. 
Accordingly  we  find  a  mixture  of  names ;  Aisumnos, 
Autonoos,  Agelaos,  are  of  the  Hellenic  class :  Dolops, 
Opites,  Opheltios,  Oros,  and  perhaps  Hipponoos,  of  the 
Pelasgic.  Dolops,  however,  is  the  son  of  Clutos,  a 
name  belonging  to  another  order. 

When  we  turn  to  the  Lycians,  whose  affinities  are 
plainly  not  Pelasgian,2  we  find  that  Odysseus  slays  in. 
succession  Koiranos,  Alastor,  Chromios,  Alcandros,  Ha- 
lios,  Noemon,  Prutanis.  These  names  are  all  probably 
of  the  Hellenic  class  ;  for  Halios  means  maritime,  and 
we  find  no  presumably  Pelasgian  names  which  point 
to  maritime  pursuits  (Astualos 3  is  simply  local) ; 
while  Chromios  seems  to  mean  bright-colored  (jcpoo^oc), 
i.e.  beautiful.  All  the  others  are  clearly  of  a  patrician 
cast. 

We  find  in  the  Iliad  ten  legitimate  sons  of  Antenor, 
and  one  bastard.  Eight  of  the  ten  have  names  palpa- 
bly of  the  Hellenic  order :  Agenor,  Acamas,  Archilo- 
chos,  Demoleon,  Echeclos,  Iphidamas,  Laodamas, 
Laodocos.   Nor  can  the  other  two,  Coon  and  Helicaon, 


i  II.  xi.  304. 


2  H.  v.  677. 


3  II.  vi.  29. 


106 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


be  referred  to  the  Pelasgian  class.  The  bastard  is 
Pedaios,  II.  v.  70 :  he  was  brought  up  on  the  same 
footing  as  the  rest. 

It  will  be  remembered  that  Homer  expressly  declares 
the  Myrmidons  to  be  Hellenic  and  Achaian.  Now  we 
have  named  among  them  Patroclos,  Menoitios,  Menes- 
thios,  Eudoros,  Peisandros,  Maimalos  (^a/^aw) ,  Alki- 
medon,  Laerkes,  Automedon.  Every  one  of  these 
names  is  of  what  I  have  described  as  the  Hellenic 
character. 

Upon  the  whole,  and  without  any  allegation  of  a 
rigid  uniformity,  indeed  with  a  confessed  inability  to 
assign  an  etymology  for  many  of  the  Homeric  names, 
still  it  may  be  held  that,  where  we  have  already  on 
other  grounds  found  reason  to  presume  Pelasgian 
blood,  there  the  names  are  frequently  related  to  peace, 
industry,  wealth,  and  are  not  of  a  soaring  character : 
whereas  in  cases  of  high  station  generally,  and  of  clear 
Hellenic  blood,  they  refer  to  valor,  fame,  command, 
mental  power,  and  the  like. 

The  chief  of  all  the  Homeric  signs  that  Greece  had 
been  occupied,  before  the  Achaian  period,  by  a  non- 
Hellenic  race,  is  to  be  found  in  the  sphere  of  religion. 
I  will  not  anticipate  what  there  will  be  an  opportunity 
of  unfolding  in  detail  hereafter.1  It  may  suffice  for 
the  present  to  observe,  that  while  the  genius  of  the 
Olympian  system  of  Homer  is  intensely  human  or 
anthropomorphic,  we  can  trace,  especially  outside  of 
that  system,  but  partially  as  adopted  into  it,  the  re- 
mains of  a  religion  of  a  different  order,  based,  princi- 
pally, at  the  least,  upon  the  worship  of  Nature-Powers, 


1  Infra,  Chap.  VII. 


THE  PELASGOI. 


107 


that  is  to  say,  of  the  powers  discerned  in  material  and 
sensible  nature. 

I  now  turn  to  glance  at  some  of  the  extra-Homeric 
evidence  of  the  wide  extension  of  the  Pelasgoi  at  an 
early  period.1 

Besides  associating  Dodona  both  with  Hellic  and 
Pelasgic  races,  Hesiod  may  be  interpreted  as  personi- 
fying Pelasgos :  a  testimony  legendary  in  itself,  but 
betokening  the  importance  of  the  race.2 

Asios,  a  very  ancient  poet,  as  quoted  by  Pausanias, 
represents  Pelasgos  to  have  been  the  child  of  Earth, 
born  upon  the  mountains  that  he  might  be  the  father 
of  men.3  iEschylus,  in  the  Supplices,4  makes  him  the 
son  of  the  earth-born  Palaichthon ;  from  him  the  Pe- 
lasgians  take  their  name :  his  dominion  reaches  from 
the  Strumon  northwards  to  the  Peloponnesos.  In  the 
reign  of  this  Pelasgos,  Danaos  comes  to  Greece.  Of 
Pelasgos,  Argos  in  the  historic  period  professed  to 
show  the  tomb.  Arcadia  held  the  tradition  that  he 
taught  the  use  of  dwellings  and  clothes,  and  to  eat 
chestnuts  instead  of  roots,  grass,  and  leaves.5  Thes- 
saly  had  its  separate  tradition  of  him. 

According  to  Herodotus,  Greece  was  anciently  called 
Pelasgia:  the  Peloponnesian  women  under  Danaos  were 
Pelasgiotides :  the  Arcadians  and  people  of  Aigialeia 
(afterwards  Achaia)  were  Pelasgian :  the  case  of  At- 
tica has  already  been  mentioned :  recollections  of  the 
Pelasgian  worship  were  preserved  in  his  day  at  Do- 
dona :  the  Pelasgian  race  subsisted  in  Samothrace  and 
Lemnos,  and  in  Plakid  and  Skulake,  settlements  on 

1  See  Bishop  Marsh,  Horae  Pelasgicae,  Cambridge,  1815. 

2  Hes.  Fragm.  x.  2.  3  Paus.  viii.  1.2.  4  v.  247. 
5  Paus.  viii.  2.  2.  • 


108 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


the  Hellespont.1  He  writes 2  that  they  use  a  foreign 
tongue ;  and  at  this  we  need  not  wonder,  when  they 
and  the  Pelasgians  of  the  Greek  peninsula  had  moved 
for  so  many  generations  on  separate  and  diverging  lines. 

Thucydides  places  the  spot,  or  building,  called  Pe- 
lasgicon,  under  the  Acropolis  at  Athens  ;  and  states 
that  the  Pelasgian  race  was  the  race  principally  diffused 
over  Greece  in  early  times.  He  also  calls  the  Pe- 
lasgians of  his  own  day  barbaroi;  the  name  then  ap- 
plied by  Greeks  to  everything  not  Greek.  He  adds 
that  they  were  of  the  same  family,  the  Tursenoi, 
who  anciently  occupied  Athens.3 

Theocritus,  early  in  the  third  century  before  Christ, 
describes  the  Pelasgians  as  the  principal  race  in  Greece 
before  the  Tro'ica;  and  Apollonius,  two  generations 
later,  calls  Thessaly  their  country.  The  Scholiast  on 
this  passage  quotes  Sophocles  in  the  Inachos  as  declar- 
ing that  Pelasgoi  and  Argeioi  were  the  same: 
which,  for  those  within  the  limits  of  Greece,  is  very 
nearly  the  conclusion  suggested  by  the  text  of  Homer 
as  a  whole.4 

Strabo  states  that  the  Pelasgoi  were  the  earliest 
lords  of  Greece ;  that  the  oracle  of  Dodona  was  a  Pe- 
lasgian foundation  ;  that  Thessaly  was  called  Pelasgic 
Argos ;  that,  according  to  Ephorus,  Pelasgia  was  a 
name  of  the  Peloponnesos ;  and  he  gives  us  the  frag- 
ment of  Euripides,  which  reports  that  Danaos  changed 
the  name  of  its  inhabitants  from  Pelasgiotai  to 
Danaoi.5 

1  Herod,  i.  146  ;  ii.  52,  56,  171 ;  vii.  94. 

2  Herod,  i.  57.  3  Thucyd.  i.  3 ;  v.  109. 

4  Theocr.  Idyll,  xv.  136-140 ;  Apoll.  Argonaut,  i.  580 ;  and  Schol. 
Paris.  3  Strabo.  vii.  p.  327  ;  y.  p.  221. 


THE  PELASGOI. 


109 


Dionysius  looks  upon  Peloponnesos  as  the  first  seat 
of  the  race,  and  affirms  that  it  was  Hellenic :  meaning, 
probably,  that  it  entered  into  the  composition  of  the 
Hellenic  body.1 

Niebuhr2  shows  the  wide  range  of  Pelasgian  occu- 
pancy in  Italy :  Cramer,  in  Greece  and  Asia  Minor.3 

1  Dion.  Halic.  i.  17.  2  Hist.  chap.  iii. 

3  Geogr.  of  Ancient  Greece,  yol.  i.  p.  15. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

Hellas. 

The  name  which  the  Greeks  have  given  their  country 
for  a  period  approaching  three  thousand  years,  and 
which  foreign  countries  have  incorrectly  rendered  by 
the  term  Greece,  is  Hellas.  It  has  a  secondary  place 
in  Homer  ;  and  yet  there  are  indications  of  its  coming 
greatness.  With  Hellas  as  a  territorial  name,  we  meet 
not  unfrequently  in  Homer ;  but  we  likewise  have  the 
derivatives  of  that  word, — 

1.  Hellenes,  H.  ii.  684. 

2.  Panhellenes,  II.  ii.  530. 

3.  Kephallenes,  II.  ii.  631  et  alibi. 

And  we  have  also  the  primitive  tribal  name  from 
which  it  is  itself  derived,  Helloi,  or  Selloi,  II.  xvi.  234. 

We  first  make  acquaintance  with  the  Hellas  of 
Homer  in  the  Catalogue.  He  takes  unusual  pains  to 
fix  in  his  picture,  as  it  were  with  fast  colors,  the 
contingent  of  Achilles.  In  four  lines  he  represents 
them, — 

1.  As  occupying  a  part  of  Pelasgic  Argos  or  Thessaly. 

2.  As  occupying  Alos,  AlopS,  Trechin,  with  Phthi^ 


HELLAS. 


Ill 


and  Hellas.  The  three  places  named  are  probably  the" 
chief  or  only  towns.1 

3.  As  bearing  the  designations  (1)  of  Myrmidons, 
(2)  of  Hellenes,  (3)  of  Achaioi. 

In  Homer,  great  part  of  Greece  is  wholly  without 
territorial  names ;  and,  when  such  names  appear,  we 
must  not  at  once  assume  that  they  are  employed  with 
the  same  precision  as  in  later  times,  when  they  came 
to  signify  districts  of  fixed  and  known  delimitation. 

Hellas  is  named  ten  times  in  the  Poems ;  four  times 
together  with  Argos,  in  the  set  phrase  ^ad'  'Elldda  xal 
(A86ov  'rAgyog^  '  throughout  Hellas  and  mid-Argos :' 
four  times  obviously  in  the  same  sense  as  in  II.  ii.  683; 
and  three  of  the  four  times  in  immediate  connection 
with  Phthie,  and  with  reference  to  territory  under  the 
dominion  of  Peleus.3 

But,  in  II.  ix.  447,  Phoenix  says  that  he  left  Hellas 
to  enter  the  dominions  of  Peleus,  and  in  II.  ix.  478, 
that  he  left  Hellas,  and  entered  Phthie.  Yet  the 
Catalogue,  and*  three  other  passages,  show  us,  that  a 
part  at  least  of  the  dominions  of  Peleus  was  called 
Hellas ;  and  the  Myrmidons  were  also  called  Hellenes, 
and  are  indeed  the  only  people  to  whom  that  designa- 
tion is  expressly  given. 

Now,  when  Phoenix  thus  took  refuge,  he  was  flying 
from  his  father  Amuntor,  who  dwelt  in  Eleon ; 4  and 
this  Eleon,  as  we  find  from  the  Catalogue,  was  in  the 
land  of  the  Boiotoi.5  Consequently  the  name  Hellas, 
besides  designating  at  least  a  part  of  the  kingdom  of 

1  See  the  Catalogue,  II.  ii.  603  seqq.,  615  seqq. 

2  Od.  i.  344 ;  iv.  726,  816  ;  xv.  80. 

3  II.  ii.  683  ;  ix.  395 ;  xvi.  595  ;  Od.  xi.  496. 

4  II.  x.  266.  .  5  ii.  ii.  500, 


112 


JUVENTUS  MTJNDI. 


Peleus,  embraced  the  country  as  far  as  to  include 
Boeotia. 

Accordingly,  it  must  have  included  the  country  of 
the  Locroi,  afterwards  called  Locris.  So  that,  when 
Homer  says  the  Oilean  Ajax  excelled,  in  the  art  of 
casting  the  spear,  6  the  Panhellenes/  that  is,  all  the 
Hellenes, 4  and  the  Achaians,'  it  is  pretty  plain  that 
the  name  Hellenes  in  his  view  embraced  the  Locroi. 

We  find,  then,  that  the  two  passages,  where  Hellas 
is  named  by  Phoenix  in  contradistinction  to  Phthie', 
are  in  general  harmony  (according  to  the  results  of 
our  previous  inquiry1)  with  those  where  it  is  mentioned 
with  Argos ;  and  that,  in  both,  it  is,  without  any  rigid 
definition  of  boundary,  a  general  name  for  the  parts  of 
Greece  north  of  the  Peloponnesos. 

And  the  four  passages,  in  which  the  name  Hellas  is 
applied  to  territory  under  the  sway  of  Peleus,  do  not 
compel  us  to  give  a  second  sense  to  the  term  ;  for  they 
do  not  imply  that  Peleus  ruled  all  Hellas,  but  only  that 
his  dominions  extended  beyond  the  territory  specially 
called  Phthie,  and  included  part  of  what  had  Hellas  for 
its  ruling  appellation. 

Phthie  itself  is  remarkable  as  the  only  territorial 
name,  denoting  a  district  of  country  without  reference 
to  a  town,  which  we  find  in  the  Greece  of  Homer  north 
of  the  Isthmus  of  Corinth.  We  may  regard  it  as  carved 
out  of  Hellas,  and  so  distinguished  from  it  when  men- 
tioned alone ;  yet  included  in  it  when  Northern  Greece 
is  named  as  a  whole.  The  phrase  4  Pelasgic  Argos '  is 
hardly  an  exception,  since  that  appears  rather  to  be  a 
description  given  by  the  Poet  of  the  great  Pelasgian 


1  Supra,  Chap.  II. 


HELLAS. 


113 


Lowlands,  than  a  recognized  and  current  title.  So  '  the 
plain  of  York '  is  a  descriptive  phrase,  not  an  estab- 
lished territorial  name. 

It  is  plain  that  Phthie  was  the  principal  part  of  the 
dominions  of  Peleus,  since  it  is  used  for  the  whole  of 
them,1  like  England  for  the  United  Kingdom.  It  was 
a  rich  and  fertile  country. 

Yet  its  inhabitants  are  never  called  Phthioi.  This 
name  is  given  to  two  other  Thessalian  contingents,  the 
second  under  Podarkes,and  the  fourth  under  Medon.2 
And  here  we  have  a  remarkable  indication  of  the  dis- 
tinction between  the  Hellenic  and  the  Pelasgian  races. 
We  cannot  doubt  that  the  kingdom  of  Peleus  had  been 
inhabited  by  Phthioi,  since  they  had  given  it  the  name 
Phthie.  We  have  no  reason  to  suppose  these  Phthians 
were  displaced  by  the  Myrmidons,  since  we  find 
Phthians  and  Myrmidons  side  by  side  in  the  same  army. 
But  the  more  distinguished  title  effaces  the  more  ob- 
scure ;  and  while  the  Phthian  name  continues  to  attach 
to  the  population  of  other  less  Hellenized  parts  of  Thes- 
saly,  in  Phthie  itself  the  people  have  in  lieu  of  it  the 
three  designations  of  Myrmidon,  Hellene,  and  Achaian ; 
Achaian,  as  a  great  and  leading  branch  of  the  illus- 
trious Achaian  family  ;  Hellene,  as  inhabiting  a  country 
included  under  the  overriding  name  of  Hellas ;  and 
Myrmidon,  probably  as  a  subsept  of  the  Achaians. 

It  is  plain,  that  Homer  has  made  use  of  special  means 
to  mark  the  Hellenic  and  Achaian  character  of  the 
kingdom  of  Peleus,  and  to  exclude  it  in  a  marked  man- 
ner from  the  category  of  Pelasgian  influences.  This 

1  II.  i.  155,  169 ;  ix.  363 ;  xix.  299. 

2  II.  xiii.  686,  693  ;  cf.  II.  ii.  704,  727. 

8 


114 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


observation,  however,  opens  up  another  subject,  to 
which  we  may  revert. 

The  word  Panhellenes,  though  only  once  used,  in 
the  description  of  the  Oilean  Ajax,  is  of  great  impor- 
tance. 6  In  spear-casting  he  excelled  the  Panhellenes 
and  Achaians.' 1  These  two  names  cannot  refer  to  the 
inhabitants  of  different  territories.  Even  if  they  did, 
the  former  would  include  the  inhabitants  of  all  Hellas, 
that  is,  of  all  Northern  and  Middle  Greece.  But  we 
know  (1)  that  there  were  Achaians  there  ;  (2)  that 
these  Achaians  were  also,  in  the  case  of  the  Myrmidons, 
called  Hellenes.  Homer  may  seem,  then,  to  designate, 
though  not  as  by  absolute  and  well-understood  syn- 
onyms, but  rather  with  a  certain  vagueness,  substan- 
tially the  same  persons,  namely  all  the  Greeks ;  but  to 
give  them  both  their  territorial  name,  and  their  blood- 
name. 

Though  Thucydides 2  is  right  in  saying  Homer  does 
not  call  the  Greeks  Hellenes,  yet  it  thus  appears  not 
improbable  that,  once  at  least,  he  calls  them  Panhel- 
lenes. Yet  the  verse  ought  hardly  to  attract  suspicion 
on  account  of  the  word,  since  independently  of  it  we 
have  sufficient  proof  that  the  territorial  name  of  Hellas 
might  be  applied  without  impropriety  to  describe  the 
range  at  least  of  Northern  and  Middle  Greece.  Nor  do 
I  broadly  deny  that  this  may  be  the  meaning  of  the 
word  Panhellenes.  If  such  be  the  true  construction, 
then  the  use  of  Panhellenes  and  Achaians  to  signify  all 
Greeks,  may  be  compared  with  the  use  of  6  Hellas  and 
the  breadth  of  Argos  '  in  the  Odyssey  to  describe  all 
Greece.    It  is  also  just  possible  that,  as  the  Achaian 


i  II.  ii.  530. 


2  i.  3. 


HELLAS. 


115 


name  has  a  leaning  to  the  dominant  class  or  aristoc- 
racy, the  Hellenic  name  may  in  this  passage  have  a 
similar  leaning,  and  may,  like  the  other,  be  used  to  de- 
note the  community,  as  the  part  supposed  more  excel- 
lent often  is  used  to  denote  the  whole. 

There  is  another  designation  in  Homer  which  seems 
probably,  if  not  certainly,  to  be  a  derivative  from  the 
same  stock — the  name  Kephallenes,  a  name  still  en- 
graved on  the  island  of  Cefalonia.  This  word  is  used 
in  the  Iliad  to  describe  the  subjects  of  Odysseus.  It, 
however,  appears  but  twice.  It  might  be  expected  to 
recur  frequently  in  the  Odyssey.  But  it  is  employed 
only  five  times,  and  never  for  the  inhabitants  of  Ithaka, 
taken  alone,  who  are  always  called  either  Ithakesioi, 
or  Achaioi.  InOd.  xx.  210  it  refers  especially  to  those 
who  inhabited  the  continental  pasture  lands  of  Odys- 
seus. In  Od.  xxiv.  354,  377, 428,  it  seems  to  be  capable 
of  no  meaning  except  the  subjects  of  Laertes  and  those 
of  Odysseus  generally,  as  in  the  Iliad.  Generally,  I 
mean,  as  opposed  to  any  narrower  territorial  limita- 
tion ;  for  I  do  not  exclude  the  belief  that  the  name  of 
Kephallenes  may  imply  the  better  blood  of  the  commu- 
nity. It  may  moreover  be  conjectured  that  this  was 
a  word,  like  Hellenes,  creeping  into  use,  but  not  as  yet 
fully  established. 

It  appears  to  be  formed  from  the  word  Hellenes, 
with  the  prefix  y.ecp-,  meaning  4  head,'  which  appears  in 
xeydlrj,  in  the  Sanscrit  kapala,  the  Latin  caput,  and  the 
German  kopf,1  not  to  mention  other  words. 

Let  us  now  ascend  to  the  word  from  which  Hellas 
itself  is  derived  ;  since  it  obviously  means,  according  to 

1  Donaldson,  New  Cratylus.  p.  291. 


116 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


a  regular  Greek  formation,  the  country  which  had  been 
occupied  by,  and  which  had  come  to  be  named  from, 
the  Helloi.  These  Helloi  appear  to  be  the  Seiloi  of 
II.  xvi.  234.  They  seem  also  to  be  a  people  of  the  rud- 
est habits,  dwellers  in  the  mountains  ;  having  prophets 
or  interpreters,  it  is  said,  not  priests,  of  Zeus,  and  be- 
ing especially  devoted  to  him  in  that  capacity.  We  have 
other  vestiges  of  this  race  in  Homer ;  in  the  name  of  a 
river  Selleeis,  which  we  find  in  or  near  Troas,1  as  well 
as  (probably)  at  more  than  one  point  in  Greece ;  and 
especially  in  the  name  Hellespontos,  which  in  Homer 
means  not  the  narrow  strait  merely,  but  the  whole  sea 
between  Troas  and  Thessaly  at  the  least,  or  the  north- 
ern iEgean.2 

Independently  of  the  grammatical  connection  be- 
tween Helloi,  Hellas,  and  Hellene,  there  can  be  little 
doubt  that  in  his  solemn  invocation,  Achilles,  himself 
described  as  a  Hellene,  means  to  invoke  Zeus  by  the  tie 
of  race.  This,  then,  is  signified  in  the  recital  concerning 
the  Seiloi,  or  Helloi,  the  sigma  and  the  aspirate  here 
representing  one  another  as  in  many  other  cases ;  for 
example,  hex,  hepta,  hud  or,  hus,  and  sex,  septem, 
sudor,  sus.  The  one  form  reappears  in  Selleeis,  and 
in  the  Proselenoi 3  of  Arcadia ;  the  other  in  Helles- 
pont, and  in  the  Hellopia  of  Hesiod. 

The  Scholiast  on  the  Birds  of  Aristophanes  4  informs 
us  that  braggarts  were  called  Seiloi ;  and  that  the  word 
oelll&iv  meant  to  vapor  or  brag.  He  derives  this 
sense  of  the  word  from  Sellos,  the  father  of  one  J&s- 
chines,  satirized  by  the  dramatist.  Now  it  seems  very 
little  probable  that  the  name  of  the  obscure  father  of  an 

i  II.  ii.  839.  2  ii.  ix.  360. 

3  See  supra,  Chap.  II.  p.  80.  4  v.  824. 


HELLAS. 


117 


obscure  man  should  thus  have  given  by  metaphor  a 
word  to  the  Greek  tongue ;  and  again,  that  the  expla- 
nation should  have  been  handed  down  from  the  time  of 
Aristophanes  to  that  of  the  Scholiast.  Such  words  as 
4  hectoring '  and  6  rhodomontading '  presuppose  a  great 
celebrity  in  the  personage  on  whose  name  they  are 
based,  as  without  this  they  would  not  be  intelligible. 
But  if  we  refer  this  phrase  to  the  ancient  Selloi,  the 
explanation  is  easy.  In  Greece,  and  especially  in  Attica, 
to  be  autochthonous  or  indigenous,  and  consequently 
to  be  of  a  very  ancient  race,  was  notoriously  matter 
not  only  of  credit  but  of  vainglory,  and  thus  to  play  the 
Sell os  would  be  a  natural  and  effective  way  of  describ- 
ing the  manners  of  a  vainglorious  person. 

The  great  Greek  chieftains  of  the  war  are  supplied  as 
follows:  Achilles,  from  a  district  of  which  the  whole 
military  class  is  expressly  described  as  Hellene  and 
Achaian ;  Idomeneus,  from  Phoenician  ancestry  ;  Odys- 
seus also,  from  a  region  in  which  the  upper  class  is 
Achaian ;  Agamemnon,  Menelaos,  Diomed,  Nestor, 
from  districts  in  which  Pelasgianism  is  wholly  sub- 
merged. The  greater  Ajax  is  the  near  kinsman  of 
Achilles,  and  we  must  therefore  suppose  the  Telamo- 
nian  race  to  be  strongly  marked  with  Hellenism. 

It  may  reasonably  be  asked,  how  it  happens  that  if 
Southern  Greece,  meaning  the  Peloponnesos  with  the 
adjoining  islands,  thus  abounds*  in  Hellenic  elements, 
we  should  be  entirely  without  traces  of  the  name  of 
Hellas  in  that  portion  of  the  country. 

We  find  indeed  its  kindred  there;  the  name  Sel- 
leeis  for  a  river,  and  Kephallenes  for  a  people.  But 
these  are  not  very  prominent.  The  proper  answer 
seems  to  be  that,  as  the  name  Hellas  took  a  natural 


118 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


precedence  over  names  of  Pelasgian  associations,  so  the 
Achaians  were  probably  the  flower  and  the  ruling  order 
of  Hellenes.  Consequently,  their  name,  where  they 
were  largely  spread,  might  tend  to  suppress  that  of 
Hellas ;  or  to  prevent  its  formation,  by  filling  already 
the  place  it  would  occupy  with  the  territorial  name 
Achaiis.  This  Achaian  name  is  here  found  prevailing 
in  the  dominions  of  Agamemnon,  of  Diomed,  of  Nestor, 
of  Odysseus :  the  same  must  be  presumed  of  those  of 
Menelaos.  And  at  least  much  the  larger  part  of  the 
Peloponnesos  seems  to  be  included  in  the  Achaic  Argos, 
besides  that  the  word  Achaiis  unquestionably  includes 
the  whole  country  from  north  to  south. 

There  may  however  be  an  inference  drawn  from  the 
local  concatenation  of  names.  Beginning  at  or  near 
Troas,  and  moving  towards  the  west,  we  have  Selleeis, 
Hellespont,  Helloi,  Hellenes,  and  (from  Hesiod)  Hel- 
lopia.  Probably  we  have  here  an  indication  that  the 
route  of  the  Hellic  tribes  into  Greece  was  by  the  Hel- 
lespont and  the  northern  extremity  of  the  country. 
They  were  not,  like  the  Pelasgians,  an  essentially  low- 
land people,  as  we  perceive  from  the  brief  description 
in  the  Invocation  of  Achilles.  The  name  Trechin,  as 
one  of  the  settlements  in  the  kingdom  of  Peleus,  allied 
as  it  is  with  Threx,  or  Thracian,  affords  a  similar 
indication.  Again,  Thamuris,  the  Bard  who  attended 
the  solemn  public  competitions  of  song,  and  challenged 
the  Muses,  and  whom  I  suppose,  like  those  compe- 
titions themselves,  to  be  Hellenic,  was  a  Thracian. 
There  is  therefore  less  difficulty  in  assigning  this 
route  unequivocally  to  the  Hellic  than  to  the  Pelasgian 
race. 


CHAPTER  V. 


The  Phcenicians  and  the  Egyptians. 
Direct  Notices. 

i.  Minos,  who  is  stated  by  Thucydides 1  to  have 
been  the  first  known  founder  of  a  maritime  empire, 
appears  in  Homer  as  the  greatest  and  most  important 
of  his  archaic  personages.  The  achievements  of  Hera- 
cles are  personal,  indeed  corporal ;  but  the  name  of 
Minos,  whether  mythical  or  not,  is  a  symbol  of  political 
power,  of  the  administration  of  justice,  in  a  word,  of 
civilization.  He  is  the  only  person,  indeed,  lying  so 
far  back  in  time  as  three  generations  before  the  War, 
about  whom  Homer  has  supplied  us  with  any  details 
of  real  and  historic  interest. 

Minos  had  Zeus  for  his  father,  and  the  daughter  of  a 
distinguished  Phoenician 2  (such  appears  to  be  the  most 
probable  interpretation,  but  in  substance  there  is  little 
doubt  about  the  meaning)  for  his  mother.  At  nine 
years  old  he  received  revelations  from  Zeus,3  and 


i  i.  4. 


2  II.  xiv.  321. 


3  II.  xiii.  450-453;  Od.  xix.  178. 


120 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


reigned  over  all  Crete,  at  that  early  age,  in  the  great 
city  of  Knossos,1  named  first  among  the  Cretan  cities 
in  the  Catalogue.  He  was  the  father  of  Deucalion, 
and  the  grandfather  of  Idomeneus,2  who,  at  the  period 
of  the  War,  was  passing  from  middle  life  into  old  age,3 
and  had  begun  to  feel  its  effects  in  failure  of  the 
organs  of  sense.  After  death,  the  Cretan  sovereign 
exercised  the  office  of  a  ruler  in  the  realm  of  Aidoneus, 
and  administered  justice  among  the  dead,4  as  a  king 
does  among  his  subjects  upon  earth.  His  brother  Rha- 
damanthus,5  hardly  less  distinguished,  has  the  custody 
of  the  Elysian  Plain.  Him  the  Phaiakes  conveyed  (by 
water  from  Scherie 6)  to  Euboea,  on  his  way  to  Pano- 
peus  of  the  Phoke  s,  for  the  purpose,  apparently,  of  his 
passing  judgment  upon  Tituos,  son  of  Gaia,  who  had 
offered  violence  to  Leto,  as  she  was  on  her  way  (pro- 
bably from  Delos)  to  Putho  or  Delphi.7  The  presump- 
tion arising  upon  these  passages  is,  that  Rhadamanthus 
was  acting  for  his  brother  Minos,  and  that  the  authority 
of  that  sovereign  prevailed  not  only  in  Scherie  but  in 
Phokis  ;  in  other  words,  that  he  bore  sway  over  a  con- 
siderable dominion,  both  maritime  and  continental,  in 
Greece. 

This  connection  with  Scherie  confirms  his  Phoeni- 
cian character  :  and  the  signs  of  an  authority  extending 
to  the  mainland  of  Greece,  and  to  the  islands  on  its 
western  coast,  appear  to  be  plain.  It  may  be  as  a  relic 
of  this  dominion,  that  we  find  in  Ithaca  a  harbor  of 
Phorcus,8  who  is  a  maritime  god  of  the  Phoenicians. 

i  II.  ii.  646.  2  Od.  xix.  180.  3  II.  xxiii.  469,  476. 

4  Od.  xi.  569.         5  Od.  iv.  564. 

6  See  the  Outer  Geography,  infra,  Chap.  XIV. 

7  Od.Vii.  321-324;  xi.  576-581.  8  Od.  xiii.  96. 


THE  PHOENICIANS  AND  THE  EGYPTIANS. 


121 


General  tradition  reports  that  Minos  laid  a  tribute 
upon  Attica.1  Of  this  we  have  no  direct  evidence 
from  Homer ;  but  the  fact  that  Theseus  went  to  Crete 
to  seek  Ariadne  the  daughter  of  Minos  to  wife,2  indi- 
cates a  political  relation  between  them,  and  in  this 
way  partially  sustains  the  tradition. 

Minos  is  in  the  last  named  passage  called  oloo- 
phron.3  This  is  a  word  confined  by  Homer  to  the 
circle  of  Phoenician  personages.  The  epithet  seems  to 
imply  in  some  form  a  formidable  if  not  injurious  craft. 
It  may  apply  to  the  character  of  the  Phoenicians  as 
astute  and  tricky  merchants,  who  acted  at  times  as 
kidnappers  and  pirates  :  but  as  it  is  applied  to  great 
personages,4  Atlas,  Aietes,  and  Minos,  it  may  probably 
refer  to  what  is  politically  formidable  ;  and,  if  so,  it 
may  well  be  a  trace  of  a  former  supremacy  in  Greece, 
standing  in  connection  with  the  Phoenician  name. 

It  may  even  be  doubted  whether  Homer  does  not 
mean  to  describe  the  Phoenician  tongue  as  still  spoken 
in  Crete  ;  for  he  says 5  that  in  that  island  there  is  a 
mixture  of  languages.  This  with  him  is  a  significant 
and  rare  expression.  It  is  difficult  to  suppose  that  he 
would  have  used  it  merely  because  the  island  contained 
Pelasgian  as  well  as  Hellenic  races.  For  he  speaks 
of  the  mixed  tongue  of  the  Trojan  army,  not  in  con- 
nection with  the  people  of  Troas,  who  probably  spoke 
the  same  or  nearly  the  same  language  with  the  Greeks, 
but  with  the  allies,6  of  whom  he  distinctly  calls  the 

1  See  the  Dialogue  Minos,  ascribed  to  Plato,  16,  17. 

2  Od.  xi.  322. 

3  0 1  o  o  s  is  applied  to  an  adverse  divinity.  See  II.  iii.  865 ; 
xxii.  15.  4  Od.  i.  52 ;  x.  137. 

5  Od.  xix.  175.  6  n.  ii.  803,  804. 


122 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


Carians  barbaroph onoi.1  He  applies  the  phrase 
allo-throoi2  to  the  people  of  Temes£  in  Cyprus,  who 
were  probably  Phoenician.  If  the  Phoenicians  gave 
Crete  its  name,  then  the  Eteocretes  of  this  passage  of 
the  Odyssey  may  be  a  Phoenician  race,  amidst  the 
other  four,  which  are  apparently  Hellenic  and  Pelas- 
gian.  This  conjecture  is  in  some  degree  supported  by 
the  fact  that  the  Poet  calls  them  meg  ale  tores,  or 
haughty ;  an  epithet  suited  to  a  race  in  possession  of 
political  ascendancy,  much  in  accordance  with  the 
oloophrdn  already  cited,  and  yet  more  closely  with 
another  of  his  Phoenician  epithets,  agauos.3 

It  is  possible  that  the  Deucalion  whom  the  later 
tradition  connects  with  Thessaly,  may  have  been  the 
son  of  Minos  ;  and  that  his  appearance  there  ought  to 
be  taken  as  another  indication  that  the  power  of  Minos 
reached  to  that  region.  Thucydides4  states  that  this 
personage  appointed  his  children  to  be  hegemones  or 
rulers ;  which  implies  a  dominion  distributed  in  pro- 
vinces, and  also  Asiatic  in  some  of  its  features. 

If  this  be  so,  then,  on  finding  Minos  installed  as  a 
ruler  in  the  Underworld,  we  reasonably  conclude  that 
he  is  not  so  placed  by  the  arbitrary  choice  of  the  Poet, 
but  that  he  governs  below  the  same  persons,  of  the 
same  countries,  which  he  had  governed  upon  earth. 
In  short,  that  his  office  there.; is  a  testimony  to  the 
existence  of  a  bygone  Phoenician  dominion,  exercised 
in  Greece  from  Crete  as  a  centre.  The  great  wealth 
of  Crete  is  eminently  in  harmony  with  this  hypothesis. 

Bishop  Thirlwall5  has  explained  the  position  of 
Minos,  as  it  is  defined  by  general  tradition.  Again, 

i  II.  ii.  867.  2  Od.  i.  183.  3  Od.  xiii.  272. 

4  i.  4.  5  Hist,  of  Greece,  i.  5. 


THE  PHOENICIANS  AND  THE  EGYPTIANS.  123 

the  existence  of  an  empire  connected  with  his  name 
best  explains  the  partial  introduction  of  Cretan  insti- 
tutions into  Laconia.  I  have  elsewhere 1  ventured  on 
the  conjecture  that  the  mnoia,  or  public  slavery,  of 
Crete  was  an  institution  of  Minos,  and  is  named  after 
him. 

Herodotus  repeats,  that  Minos  expelled  his  brother 
Sarpedon  from  Crete ;  and  that  Sarpedon  colonized 
Lycia,  which,  even  in  the  time  of  the  historian,  was 
governed  by  laws  partly  Cretan.  If  the  royal  house 
of  Lycia  was  thus  connected  with  that  of  Crete,  and 
with  the  man  who  made  the  first  recorded  effort  to 
bind  Greece  together  in  civil  order,  it  gives  a  satis- 
factory explanation  to  the  remarkable  partiality  which 
the  poet  always  shows  in  the  Iliad  for  the  Lukioi  or 
Lycians,  far  above  all  the  other  portions  of  the  Trojan 
force. 

Again,  Homer  places  Daidalos  in  Crete  ;  and  says 
that  he  wrought  there  for  Ariadne,  in  metal,  a  dance, 
which  formed  the  model  of  that  wrought  by  Hephaistos 
on  the  shield  of  Achilles.2  He  could  not  more  dis- 
tinctly have  connected  the  Crete  of  Minos  with  the 
Phoenicians  than  by  placing  there  the  great  traditional 
producer  of  works  in  metallic  art,  from  whose  name 
was  taken  the  verb  daiddllEiv,  to  embellish. 

Next  to  Minos  we  m%  consider  the  case  of  Kadmos 
in  connection  with  the  Phoenician  name  and  race. 
Homer  gives  us  conclusive  evidence  of  the  migration 
of  such  a  persan  into  Greece,  by  calling  the  inhabitants 
of  Thebes,  one  generation  before  the  Tro'ica,  by  the 

1  Studies  on  Homer,  vol.  i.  p.  179. 

2  II.  xviii.  592. 


124  JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 

names  of  Kadmeioi  and  Kadmeiones.  His  proper 
name  is  only  mentioned  in  the  Odyssey  as  the  father 
of  Leukothee,1  once  a  mortal,  now  deified  in  the  Sea- 
region,  who  appears  to  Odysseus  after  the  wreck  of  his 
raft  on  the  way  from  Ogugie,  and  provides  him  with  a 
girdle  for  his  preservation  from  the  angry  flood. 
There  could  hardly  be  a  more  distinct  intimation  of 
the  Phoenician  extraction  of  Ino  than  her  deification, 
not  in  Greece,  but  in  the  Sea-sphere,  and  her  appear- 
ing to  Odysseus  before  he  had  regained  the  threshold 
of  the  Greek  world. 

We  learn  from  general  tradition  that  the  Thebes  of 
Kadmos  had  seven  gates,  which  were  in  correspond- 
ence with  the  sevenfold  planetary  worship  of  the  East. 
And  Homer  2  calls  the  Thebes  of  the  Kadmeioi  seven- 
gated.  But  Kadmos  was  not  the  first  founder  of  the 
city  :  its  first  founders  were  Amphion  and  Zethos : 3 
and  Homer,  when  he  mentions  the  foundation  by  them, 
does  not  call  it  seven-gated,  but  champaign,  from  the 
character  of  the  country,  conformably  to  the  description 
given  by  Thucydides. 

In  the  Underworld  of  the  Odyssey  we  find  a  great 
proportion  of  persons  having  Phoenician  associations. 
Again,  the  name  Phoinix  had,  at  the  epoch  of  the 
War,  been  variously  naturalized  in  Greece.  Besides 
being  a  Greek  proper  name,  it  also  meant  a  Phoeni- 
cian, a  palm-tree,  and  a  purple  dye.4 

The  most  important  works  of  art  named  in  the 
poems  are  obtained  from  the  Phoenicians.  Not  only 
was  this  the  case  with  works  in  metal,  but  it  was  from 
Sidonia  that  Paris  brought  the  beautifully  wrought 

i  Od.  v.  333  2  ii.  iY.  406.  3  Od.  xi.  263. 

4  Od.  xiv.  288 ;  vi.  163  ;  II.  iv.  141. 


THE  PHOENICIANS  AND  THE  EGYPTIANS. 


125 


tissues  which  were  so  prized  by  the  royal  family  of 
Troy.1  And  all  navigation,  except  that  of  the  coasts 
and  the  ^Egean,  appears  to  be,  at  the  Homeric  period, 
practically  in  the  hands  of  the  same  people.  The 
Taphians,  who  carry  iron  to  Temese  2  in  Cyprus,  and 
mean  to  bring  back  copper,  appear  clearly  to  be  a 
Phoenician  colony.  Odysseus,  feigning  that  he  had 
escaped  from  Crete  to  Ithaca,3  speaks,  as  if  it  had  been  a 
matter  of  course,  about  the  ship's  company  who  brought 
him,  as  Phoenicians.  In  his  second  fiction,4  and  here 
again  as  if  it  were  a  matter  of  course,  it  is  a  Phoeni- 
cian rogue  who  inveigled  him  in  Egypt,  carried  him  to 
Phoenicia,  and  then  intended  to  take  him  to  Libya  and 
sell  him  for  a  slave.  When  Odysseus  represents  him- 
'self  in  another  of  his  fictions  as  a  practised  navigator, 
he  is  a  Cretan,  but  he  is  one  of  the  highest  station,  and 
represents  himself  as  having  been  the  colleague  of  Ido- 
meneus  in  the  Trojan  command ;  therefore,  probably, 
as  like  him  of  a  Phoenician  family.5  Eumaios,  telling 
of  his  own  home  in  the  distant  Surie,6  describes  how 
the  Phoenicians  came  thither  for  trade  or  kidnapping, 
and  how  a  Phoenician  woman  was  a  domestic  in  his 
father's  house.7  Alone  among  the  races  of  the  epoch, 
the  Phoinikes,  with  their  imagined  counterparts,  the 
Phaiakes,  are  called  nausiclutoi,8  ■  ship-famous.' 

The  immense  fame  acquired,  and  the  mythical 
character  assumed,  by  the  single  great  Achaian 
voyage  of  the  traditionary  fore- time,  that  of  the  ship 
Argo  to  the  Euxine,  combine  with  all  the  other 
negative  evidence  of  the  Poems  to  prove  to  us  how 

i  II.  vi.  289.  2  Od.  i.  184.  3  Od.  xiii.  272. 

4  Od.  xiy.  290-300.       5  Od.  xiv.  230,  237.       6  Od.  xv.  403. 
7  lb.  417.  8  Od.  xv.  415;  vii.  39;  xvi.  227. 


126 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


completely  the  Greeks  of  the  Homeric  age  were  de- 
pendent on  the  Phoenicians  for  their  ordinary  inter- 
course with  the  outer  world  ;  and  the  outer  world 
here  means  everything  beyond  the  Greek  Peninsula, 
with  the  islands  coasting  it  to  the  south  of  the  Corin- 
thian Gulf,  and  with  the  islands  and  coasts  of  the 
iEgean. 

Besides  the  name  Phoinix,  we  have  in  the  poems 
the  names  of  Marathon,  Turo  (Tyre),  and  Danae,1 
which  are  all  apparently  represented  in  Phoenician 
names  still  traceable  on  that  coast. 

The  direct  notices  of  Egypt  in  the  Poems  are  much 
narrower  than  those  of  Phoenicia;  and  the  name 
Aiguptios,2  borne  by  an  Ithacan  noble,  is  perhaps 
the  sole  positive  trace  which  we  find  of  an  Egyptian 
influence  within  the  limits  of  Greece. 

Egyptian  Thebes  was  known  as  a  city  of  vast 
wealth,  with  twenty  thousand  persons  possessed  of 
chariots,  and  with  an  hundred  gates.3 

In  the  Odyssey  we  learn  that  Menelaos,  driven 
by  the  winds,  visited  the  Aiguptioi.4  In  the  palace 
of  Menelaos,5  one  of  the  attendants  of  Helen  carried 
her  silver  basket,6  given  her  by  Alkandre,  wife  of 
Polubos,  who  dwelt  in  Egyptian  Thebes.  Helen  had 
likewise  the  drug  of  marvellous  effects,  which  may 
have  been  opium.  This  drug  had  been  presented  to  her 
by  the  Egyptian  Poludamna,  wife  of  Thon.7  It  grew 
in  Egypt,  which  abounds  in  drugs,  and  where  all  the 
inhabitants  are  unrivalled  physicians,  being  of  the 
race  of  Paieon.8 


1  See  Kenan's  Phenicie. 

3  II.  ix.  381-384 ;  Od.  iv.  127. 

5  Od.  iv.  87. 

1  Od.  iv.  227-232. 


2  Od.  ii.  15. 
4  Od.  iii.  300. 
6  Od.  iv.  125. 

8  See  Paieon,  infra,  Chap.  VIII. 


THE  PHOENICIANS  AND  THE  EGYPTIANS.  127 

In  this  region  Menelaos  was  detained  by  the  gods 
for  neglecting  to  offer  the  proper  sacrifices,  at  Pharos,1 
a  day's  sail  from  the  mainland.  There  he  had  his 
interview  with  Eidothee,  and  his  conflict  with  Proteus, 
the  servant  of  Poseidon.2  By  Proteus,  after  his 
victory,  he  was  directed  to  return  to  the  mouth  of 
the  river  Nile,  which,  as  well  as  the  country,  was 
called  Aiguptos.  At  that  point  he  was  to  make  his 
offerings,  which  he  did.  And  there  he  erected  a 
funeral  mound  in  honor  of  Agamemnon,  4  for  his 
eternal  fame.'3  This  passage  seems  to  show  either 
that  Agamemnon  was  already  known  in  Egypt,  or 
that  the  memorial  would  make  him  famous  because 
it  was  in  so  famous  a  country.  In  either  sense,  partic- 
ularly in  the  latter,  the  recital  savors  of  some  tradition 
which  exhibited  Egypt  as  a  great  centre  of  power. 

In  the  fiction  where  Odysseus  pretends  to  be  a 
Cretan,  and  the  bastard  son  of  Kastor,  he  relates 
that  he  sailed  to  Egypt  with  a  crew,  who  in  spite  of 
him  began  to  lay  waste  the  exceeding  fine  fields  (peri- 
calleas  agrous)  of  the  Egyptians,4  and  to  assail  the 
inhabitants.  Next  morning  the  Egyptians  gather  in 
great  numbers  and  drive  off  the  marauders,  killing 
many,  and  reducing  the  rest  to  slavery.  As  being 
their  chief,  he  besought  the  king's  mercy.  He  was 
treated  with  exceeding  kindness  both  by  the  king, 
and,  after  the  first  excitement,  by  the  people.  In 
this  passage 5  Homer  calls  Egypt '  the  well-watered.' 

In  another  fiction  Odysseus  relates  that  he  went 
with  free-wandering  pirates,  probably  meaning  Phoeni- 

i  Od.  iv.  351  seqq.  2  Od.  iv.  386.  »  lb.  584. 

4  Od.  xiv.  249-287.  5  lb.  257. 


128 


JUVEXTUS  MO  PI. 


eians.  to  Egypt,  and  the  very  same  circumstances  are 
repeated  :  but  this  time,  instead  of  his  applying  to  the 
king,  and  obtaining  mercy,  he  reports  that  they  made 
him  over  to  Demetor.  the  lord  of  Cyprus.1 

TVe  have  no  such  thing  as  a  voluntary  voyage  to 
E^rypt  by  a  pure  Greek,  or  as  any  voyage  to  Greece  by 
an  Egyptian.  The  sea  which  separates  them  is  so  wide, 
that  the  very  birds  can  traverse  it  but  once  a  year.2 

And  yet.  though  Homer  knew  little  of  Egypt,  he 
had  informants  who  told  him  of  what  lay  beyond  it. 
Most  strange  it  is  to  tind  that  his  account  of  the  Pug- 
niaioi  or  Pigmies.3  so  long  regarded  as  pure  fable,  has 
been  found,  according  to  recent  travellers,  to  be  found- 
ed in  fact. 

Such  are  the  direct  Homeric  notices  of  these  two 
countries.  But  eight  Books  of  the  Odyssey  ( v-xii) 
describe  the  adventures  of  the  hero  on  his  way  home. 
Erom  the  time  when  he  leaves  the  Kikones.  whose 
country  is  his  very  first  halting-place,  and  passes  Cape 
Malea.  the  scene  of  these  adventures  is  in  an  outer 
world,  evidently  foreign  to  Greek  experience.  They 
are  made  up  from  materials  just  such  as  the  tales  of 
daring  seamen  would  supply,  with  the  double  resource 
of  strange  fact  and  of  embellishment  at  will :  and.  in 
all  probability,  also  with  a  tendency  to  give  to  places 
and  persons  an  aspect  not  too  inviting  to  the  Greeks, 
who  might  have  seemed  capable  of  becoming,  as  indeed 
thev  did  become,  their  competitors  in  a  lucrative  pur- 
suit. 

i  Od.  xrii.  424-444.  2  Od.  iii.  318-322. 

§  H.  iii.  6.  See  in  the  Eeme  des  Deux  Mondes  for  Oct.  1856,  Re- 
view of  the  work  of  the  German  missionary.  Dr.  Krapf.  pp.  £86.  904. 
These  Pigmies  are  1  hauts  d'un  metre  a  un  metre  trente  centimetres/ 


THE  PHCENICIANS  AND  THE  EGYPTIANS.  129 

Among  the  reasons  for  supposing  the  materials  of 
this  part  of  the  Odyssey  to  be  Phoenician,  come  first 
these  two,  that  Greek  experience  could  not  have  sup- 
plied them,  and  that  the  Phoenicians  could. 

Thirdly,  we  are  brought  into  contact,  while  the  scene 
is  laid  in  this  region,  with  an  altered  mythology. 
Most  of  the  Olympian  deities  retire,  for  the  time,  from 
the  stage.  On  the  other  hand,  the  prerogatives  of 
Poseidon  are  enhanced ;  and  we  even  find  him  appar- 
ently presiding  at  an  Olympian  meeting.1  A  new 
deity,  faintly  glanced  at  in  the  Iliad  as  having  Trojan 
sympathies,  comes  forward  in  full  personality  and  with 
distinct  attributes.  Poseidon's  sway  seems  to  lie 
towards  the  west  and  north :  it  is  as  we  move  east- 
ward that  we  encounter  Helios,  the  Sun.  He  appears 
as  a  recognized  member  of  the  Court  of  Immortals  : 
he  has  descendants,  and  satellites,  and  an  island  on 
earth  especially  consecrated  to  him.  Here,  too,  we 
trace  the  strongest  marks  of  the  sacredness  of  the  ox, 
an  idea  wholly  alien*  to  the  Hellenic  mythology.  And, 
in  these  Books  of  the  Poem,  both  sea  and  land  are 
peopled  with  new  and  strange  half-human  races,  and 
with  a  fresh  series  or  cycle  of  personages  properly 
mythological,  who  stand  in  no  relations  to  the  most 
familiar  of  the  Greek  deities,  but  only  to  Poseidon  and 
Helios.  Nay  a  change  even  of  diet  confronts  us  ;  and, 
as  we  get  clear  away  from  the  Hellenic  world,  the  ox 
ceases  to  be  used  as  food,  his  place  being  taken  by 
sheep  and  swine.  In  short  the  evidence  is  full  and 
thick,  to  the  effect  that  we  have  passed  into  a  new  and 
foreign  world. 


i  Od.  viii.  322,  344. 
9 


180 


JUVENTUS  MUNDT. 


When  such  evidence  has  reached  the  point  of  suffi- 
ciency for  a  legitimate  induction,  it  gives  us  authority 
to  pronounce  Phoenician,  from  the  company  in  which 
we  find  it,  even  what  may  not  of  itself  and  directly 
bear  the  stamp :  and  further,  when  reflected  on  the 
Hellenic  world,  it  enables  us  to  discern  and  identify 
many  notes  of  Phoenician  influence,  which,  but  for 
this  clue,  we  should  have  been  unable  to  detect. 

And  the  consequence  is,  that  we  find  the  debt  of 
Greece  to  Phoenicia  to  be  very  large :  so  large  as  to  be 
inexplicable,  until  we  bear  in  mind  that,  if  the  Phoeni- 
cians were  the  only  foreigners  at  that  time  in  ordinary 
contact  with  Greece,  it  is  highly  probable  that  all, 
which  the  Greeks  knew  or  received  through  the  arrival 
of  Phoenician  vessels,  would  with  them  commonly  bear 
the  Phoenician  name.  It  may  indeed  well  have  hap- 
pened that  the  name  Phoenician  should,  for  the  Greek 
people  of  that  day,  become  the  synonym  or  represen- 
tative of  '  foreign  ; '  so  that  whatever  came  from  Syria, 
Assyria,  or  Egypt,  would  sound  as  Phoenician  to  the 
Homeric  ear,  much  as  in  later  times  every  foreigner 
in  the  Levant  was  a  Frank,  and  as  in  Abyssinia  (we 
are  told),  a  foreigner  is,  at  this  our  own  epoch,  termed 
an  Egyptian. 

Phoenicia,  so  understood,  comes  to  mean  for  Homer, 
when  taken  in  its  widest  sense,  the  East :  and  the  con- 
clusion to  which  I  am  led,  as  the  probable  result  of  an 
inquiry  much  too  large  to  be  here  set  out  in  detail,  is 
no  less  than  this  :  that,  under  cover  of  the  Phoenician 
name,  we  can  trace  the  channels,  through  which  the 
old  parental  East  poured  into  the  fertile  soil  of  the 
Greek  mind  the  seeds  of  civilization  in  very  many  (to 


THE  PHOENICIANS  AND  THE  EGYPTIANS.  131 


speak  moderately)  of  its  most  conspicuous  prov- 
inces.1 

To  begin  with  Greek  commerce  and  navigation. 
Both  these  pursuits  were  in  Phoenician  hands  at  the 
epoch  of  the  Poems.  Ever  since  the  time  of  Minos, 
without  doubt,  the  Greeks  had  been  their  apt  pupils : 
but,  even  at  the  epoch  of  the  Troi'ca,  they  were  far 
behind  their  masters.  From  what  Homer  says  of  the 
Arcades,2  I  conclude  that  the  Pelasgian  tribes  were  not 
apt  to  acquire  nautical  habits. 

It  is  on  general  tradition  that  we  must  in  a  great 
degree  rely  for  showing  that  Greece  owed  to  Phoeni- 
cia, by  the  immigration  of  Kadmos,  the  gift  of  letters  : 
and  these  were  probably  at  first  rudimentary  symbol- 
ical signs,  rather  than  a  regular  alphabet.  For,  had 
an  alphabet  been  conveyed  to  Greece  several  genera- 
tions before  the  War,  we  must  surely  have  perceived 
more  of  its  results.  But  the  general  tradition,  thus 
understood,  receives  both  direct  and  indirect  support 
from  the  text  of  Homer.  Proitos,  ruling  over,  or,  as  it 
might  well  be  rendered,  mightier  than,  the  Argeioi,3 
sends  by  Bellerophon  a  fatal  message,  couched  in  signs 
which  were  intelligible,  not  to  the  bearer,  but  to  the 
receiver.  Now  one  of  the  seven  gates  of  Thebes  bore 
the  name  of  Proitos.4  He  is  spoken  of  as  one  who  had 
come  in  and  acquired  a  sovereignty  in  Greece  by 
strength  or  talent.5  On  the  one  side,  he  is  in  relations 
with  the  family  of  Sisuphos,  which  we  shall  find  reason 

1  The  argument  is  partly  stated  in  the  Quarterly  Review  for  Jan- 
uary, 1868,  art.  '  Phoenicia  and  Greece.' 

2  II.  ii.  614.  3  II.  vi.  157. 

4  Paus.  ix.  8.  4;  JEsch.  Sept.  360;  Eurip.  Phoen.  1109. 

5  II.  vi.  159. 


132 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


to  suppose  Phoenician  ;  on  the  other  side,  with  the 
royal  house  of  Lycia,  as  to  which  we  have  already 
found  similar  presumptions.1  And  these  facts  date 
from  a  period  of  two  generations  before  the  War.  Yet, 
in  the  ordinary  dealings  of  the  Greeks,  we  find  nothing 
like  written  memorial  or  record.  It  appears,  then,  as 
if  an  art  of  writing,  but  one  of  rude  and  ill-developed 
contrivance,  remained  in  Greece  as  an  occult  art,  the 
privileged  possession  of  a  few  Phoenician  families. 

The  Pelasgians  have  been  sometimes  supposed  to 
have  brought  the  art  of  building  with  hewn  stone  into 
Greece.  And  yet  the  rival  name,  commonly  given  to 
the  ancient  remains  of  this  class,  is  Cyclopian.  But 
what  is  Cyclopian  is,  as  we  see  from  the  Odyssey,  im- 
mediately related  to  Poseidon  and  to  the  cycle  of  Phoe- 
nician tradition.  Now  I  think  we  may  lay  down  this 
rule  :  that  wherever  Homer  mentions  solid  building, 
or  the  use  of  hewn  or  polished  stone,  we  find  it  always 
in  some  relation  to  the  Phoenicians.  Tiriins  is  4  the 
well-walled.' 2  But  Apollodorus,  Strabo,  and  Pausan- 
ias  3  report  (in  no  conflict  with  Homer)  that  it  belonged 
to  Proitos,  and  was  built  for  him  by  the  Cyclops.  The 
wall  of  Troy,4  which  so  long  defied  the  Greeks,  -  was 
built  by  Poseidon  5  the  Phoenician  god  :  that  is  to  say, 
by  Phoenician  artisans.  The  same  supposition  will 
apply  to  another  Trojan  edifice,  the  palace  of  Priam.6 
Again,  there  were  polished  stones  in  the  mansion  of 
Kirke  ; 7  a  Phoenician  goddess.     There  was  a  court 


1  II.  vi.  153,  168.  2  II.  ii.  559. 

3  Apollodorus,  B.  ii.  c.  2 ;  Strabo,  viii.  p.  372 ;  Pans.  ii.  16.  4  ;  Pind. 
Pragm.  642. 

4  II.  xxi.  516.  5  II.  xxi.  446. 
6  II.  vi.  242,  243.  7  Od.  x.  211. 


THE  PHOENICIANS  AND  THE  EGYPTIANS.  133 


before  the  cave  of  the  Cyclops  1  built  with  hewn  stone  ; 
and  the  Agore  or  market-place  of  Scherie  2  was  con- 
structed in  like  manner  ;  both  scenes  belonging  to  the 
Outer  or  Phoenician  world. 

That  the  Phaiakes,  the  people  of  Scherie,  now 
Corfu,  were  Phoenicians,  has  been  argued  by  Col.  Mure 3 
from  their  name  and  their  pursuits.  There  are  abun- 
dance of  confirmatory  arguments  ;  such  as  the  worship 
of  Poseidon  as  their  chief  god ; 4  the  descent  of  their 
royal  house  from  him  ; 5  the  return  of  Athene  from 
Scherie'  to  Athens  by  Marathon,6  a  place  which  was  out 
of  her  way,  but  which  appears,  from  a  comparison  of 
the  word  with  the  Marathus  of  Phoenicia,7  to  have  been 
a  Phoenician  settlement.  Now  we  observe,  that  these 
Phaiakes  prided  themselves  especially  on  their  skill 
in  games  :  in  boxing,  wrestling,  leaping,  running  : 8 
and  Odysseus  gained  immense  honor  by  his  successful 
cast  of  the  quoit.9  The  games  in  Scherie  are  the  only 
games  regularly  described  in  Homer,  besides  those  of 
the  Twenty-third  Iliad.  They  do  not  include  the  horse 
or  the  chariot  race,  nor  is  the  horse  mentioned  any- 
where in  Scherie.  But  they  appear  to  give  us  a  clear 
indication  that  the  use  of  these  competitive  matches  in 
feats  of  bodily  strength  was  derived  from  the  Phoeni- 
cians. And  if  so,  then,  taken  in  connection  with  the 
absence  of  the  horse  from  Scherie,  they  suggest  a  natu- 
ral explanation  of  what  I  for  one  have  found  a  most 
difficult  subject,  namely,  the  close  connection  between 
the  horse  and  the  god  Poseidon,  by  the  following  hypo- 

1  Od.  ix.  185.  2  od.  vi.  267. 

3  History  of  Greek  Literature,  i.  510.  4  Od.  vi.  266. 

5  Od.  vii.  56.      6  Od.  vii.  80.          1  Renan,  Phenicie,  pp.  20,  97. 

8  Od.  viii.  100-103,  158-164.  9  Od.  viii.  235,  seqq. 


134 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


thesis.  That  the  institution  of  games,  being  Phoeni- 
cian, was  under  the  god  Poseidon.  That  the  legend 
of  the  Centaurs,  and  the  immense  preponderance  of 
interest  attaching  to  the  chariot-race  in  IL  xxiii., 
warrant  us  in  the  belief  that  the  Hellenic  tribes,  much 
given  to  horsemanship,  introduced  the  horse  into  the 
institution  of  the  Games.  And  lastly,  that  the  horse, 
by  his  introduction  into  the  Games,  which  (from  II. 
xi.)  we  know  to  have  taken  place  at  least  two  genera- 
tions before  the  Tro'ica,  came  under  the  special  care 
and  patronage  of  Poseidon. 

With  respect  to  fine  art,  it  seems  impossible  to  re- 
sist the  clear  and  ample  evidence  of  the  Homeric  text, 
to  the  effect,  first,  that  works  well  deserving  that  name 
in  all  essentials  .existed  in  the  time  of  Homer ; 1  and 
secondly,  that  they  are  exhibited  to  us  as  proceeding 
from  a  Phoenician  source. 

Lastly,  there  is  reason  from  Homer  to  suppose,  that 
not  perhaps  the  vital  spark  of  poetry,  but  yet  the  use 
and  art  of  music  came  to  Greece  from  those  whom  he 
calls  Phoenicians.  In  the  first  place,  it  is  only  in  the 
palace  of  Alkinoos  that  Homer  has  presented  us  with 
the  Bard  actually  at  work ;  not  only  as  one  regularly 
installed  in  the  household,  but  with  his  successive  lays 
given  at  length.  In  the  palace  of  Odysseus,  the  Poet 
only  mentions,  and  that  but  once,2  the  subject  of  the 
lay :  in  the  palaces  of  Menelaos  and  Nestor,  which  af- 
forded admirable  opportunities,  we  do  not  hear  of  the 
Bard  at  all.  Again,  when  we  enter  the  mythologic 
circle  of  the  Phoenicians,  we  have  all  the  beings  of  the 
highest  order,  whom  it  contains,  engaged  in  music : 


1  See  '  Hephaistos '  and  'Art/  infra,  Chap.  VIII.  sect.  ix. ;  and 
Chap.  XIV.  sect.  ii.  2  Qd.  i.  326. 


THE  PHOENICIANS  AND  THE  EGYPTIANS.  135 

the  Sirens,  who  may  be  called  goddesses  of  the  chant ; 
Calypso  and  Kirke,  who  have  no  special  connection 
with  the  art,  but  both  of  whom  are  found  singing  in 
their  respective  abodes.1 

If  these  reasonings  be  well  founded,  it  may  be  asked 
what  contributions  were  made  by  Pelasgians  and 
Hellenes  to  that  marvellous  aggregate  which  we  know 
as  the  Greek  nation.  The  answer,  I  presume,  would 
be  this.  That  the  Pelasgian  races  brought  into  Greece 
the  pursuits  of  agriculture,  and  the  habits  of  a  settled 
life.  That  the  practice,  or  discipline  (it  was  more 
than  a  sport),  of  hunting,  which  had  so  powerful  a 
hold  on  the  mind  of  Homer,  and  that  a  high  political 
genius,  together  with  an  extraordinary  excellence  in 
war,  were  rather  due  to  the  masculine  habits,  both 
mental  and  bodily,  of  the  Hellenic  tribes.  But  that 
the  main  question  is  not  the  actual  possession  of  this 
or  that  accomplishment,  of  this  or  that  institution ;  it 
is  the  possession  of  the  quality,  in  soul  or  body,  which 
is  adapted  first  to  receive  the  gift  as  into  a  genial  bed, 
and  then  so  to  develop  its  latent  capabilities  as  to 
carry  them  onwards,  and  upwards,  to  its  perfection. 
Among  all  the  gifts  of  the  great  nations  of  modern 
Europe,  how  many  are  there  which  we  can  affirm  to 
be,  in  each  case,  absolutely  original  ? 2 

But  then  follows  the  just  demand  of  a  sound  criti- 
cism, that  for  such  gifts  as  it  may  seem  that  the  East 
may  have  conveyed  to  Greece  at  the  time  when  its 
energies  were  beginning  to  expand,  we  ought  to  be  able 
to  point  out  an  adequate  personal  medium,  through 

1  Od.  v.  61  ;  x.  221. 

2  It  seems  to  be  admitted  that  the  very  bagpipe  of  the  Highlander 
is  a  comparatively  modern  introduction. 


136 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


which  the  communication  was  effected.  It  would  be 
much  to  lay  all  this  honor  upon  Minos,  whose  empire, 
whatever  it  was,  had  passed  away,  and  the  more  en- 
during fruits  of  whose  political  achievements  do  not 
seem,  for  the  time,  to  have  reached  beyond  the  bounds 
of  Crete  ;  or  upon  Kadmos,  whose  influence,  whatever 
it  had  been,  certainly  had  not  made  the'  Thebes  of  the 
Troic  period  an  '  eye  of  Greece '  or  a  recognized  centre 
of  its  civilization,  as  it  ought  to  have  done  had  he  sup- 
plied the  channel  through  which  were  so  largely  trans- 
mitted by  his  mother-country  the  gifts  of  civilization : 
not  to  mention,  that  with  respect  to  each  of  these  per- 
sonages it  is  questioned  whether  they  were  real,  or 
only  mythical.  Minos,  indeed,  stands  near  the  period 
of  the  War.  But  Kadmos  is  more  remote  ;  and  I  learn 
from  distinguished  authority  that  his  name  signifies 
simply  one  coming  from  the  East.  Either  way,  it  may 
justly  be  urged  that  a  channel  should  be  indicated  for 
those  most  fruitful  communications,  which  I  suppose 
to  have  taken  place.  To  this  reasonable  demand  I 
propose  to  suggest  a  reply. 

But  here  our  path  must  be  a  little  circuitous.  In 
my  Studies  on  Homer  I  have  endeavored  to  point  out, 
that  we  have  no  warrant  from  the  Poems  for  speaking 
of  an  iEolic  dialect  of  the  Greek  tongue,  or  of  supposed 
iEolians  as  the  prevailing  race  of  Greeks  at  the  Troic 
or  the  Homeric  period.  Nor  is  Homer  merely  silent  on 
the  subject ;  for  while  he  tells  us  nothing  of  the  exist- 
ence of  the  iEolians  as  a  tribe,  he  tells  us  of  Aiolid 
houses,  and  gives  us  to  understand  that  from  this 
stock  proceeded  a  considerable  proportion  of  the  reign- 
ing families  of  Greece  during  and  before  his  time. 
From  him  we  hear  of  Sisuphos  reigning  in  Corinth, 


THE  PHOENICIANS  AND  THE  EGYPTIANS.  137 

descended  from  Aiolos :  of  the  Neleids  in  Pulos,  of 
Pelias,  of  Aison,  Pheres,  Amuthaon,  all  similarly  de- 
scended :  of  Augeias  reigning  in  fertile  Elis,  to  whom 
tradition  gives  a  similar  extraction.  The  question 
arises,  were  these  Aiolids  Phoenician  ? 

If  they  were,  we  have  to  add  to  them,  first,  Kadmos 
and  Minos,  already  reckoned  ;  then  the  great  house  of 
the  Actoridai,  which  is  described  as  being  descended 
from  Poseidon  ;  then  Proitos,  who  made  himself  King 
of  the  Argeioi;  and,  lastly,  there  is  every  reason  to 
suppose  that  Danaos  was  a  Phoenician.  That  in  the 
later  tradition  he  stands  for  an  Egyptian  is  not  to  be 
wondered  at,  when  we  consider  how  the  two  countries 
melted  into  one  another,  in  the  view  of  the  early 
Greeks,  like  a  concave  line  of  bays  upon  a  coast  trend- 
ing towards  a  distant  horizon ;  and  while  Phoenician 
vessels  were  the  channel  of  communication,  Phoenicia 
itself  was,  before  the  time  of  the  Tro'ica,  deeply 
charged  with  Egyptian  elements.  M.  Renan  has  found 
a  district  in  the  neighborhood  of  Tripoli  called  Dan- 
nie,1 or  Dyanniyeh.  So  in  the  old  Irish  histories  we 
find  that  the  third  recorded  invasion  of  the  island  was 
effected  by  the  Tuath-de-Danaans,  who  are  stated  to 
have  been  a  Greek  people.2  No  doubt  they  are  set 
down  as  Greek,  because  of  the  connection  established 
in  Homer  between  Greece  and  the  Danaan  name.  But 
we  see  at  once,  so  far  as  the  Irish  tradition  is  con- 
cerned, how  much  more  appropriate  it  becomes,  if  the 
name  Danaan  be  of  Phoenician  extraction.  Again : 
Pausanias  tells  us3  that  there  stood  at  the  reputed 


1  Phenicie,  p.  123. 

2  The  Irish  before  the  Conquest,  by  M.  C.  Ferguson,  p.  7. 

3  ii.  16.  4. 


138 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


landing-place  of  Danaos,  on  the  Argive  coast,  a  temple 
of  Poseidon  Genesios,  an  association  which  at  once 
assigns  to  that  personage  a  Phoenician  origin. 

I  return,  then,  to  the  question  of  the  Aiolids.  And, 
first,  as  to  Troas.  We  have  found  signs  that  in  Ilios, 
Troy  of  the  plain,  the  Phoenicians  themselves,  or  the 
Phoenician  worship  of  Poseidon,  had  been  cast  out; 
and  this  ejection  is  probably  represented  in  the  poetic 
or  traditionary  fiction,  that  the  god  Poseidon  had  be- 
come bitterly  hostile  to  the  city  of  Priam.  Not  so  in 
Dardania ;  for  Poseidon  specially  protects  ^Eneas,  the 
heir  to  that  sovereignty,  and  rescues  him,  at  the  criti- 
cal moment,  from  the  attack  of  Achilles.1  This  at 
once  betokens  a  relation  between  Poseidon  and  the 
Dardanian  branch  of  the  royal  house  of  Troas. 

Here  history  comes  in  to  our  aid.  Pausanias2  and 
others  assure  us  that,  in  the  historic  period,  there  were 
iEolians  at  a  place  called  Assos  in  Troas,  and  that  an 
iEolian  race  held  what  was  reputed  to  have  been  Troy. 
And  the  general  connection  of  iEolians  with  the  wor- 
ship of  Poseidon  may,  I  believe,  be  taken  as  an  uncon- 
tested fact. 

Everything  combines  to  raise  the  presumption  thus 
obtained,  about  the  Phoenicianism  of  the  Aiolids,  to 
the  rank  of  a  rational  conclusion.  Take,  for  example, 
the  fact  that  Homer  never  mentions  Aiolos  himself  in 
conjunction  with  his  Aiolids.  Considering  their  illus- 
trious position,  this  reticence  demands  observation ; 
especially  as  in  almost  every  case  Homer  names  the 
person  who  stands  at  the  head  of  one  of  his  genealo- 
gies.   If  Aiolos  were  a  Greek,  either  born  or  natural- 


i  II.  xx.  318-340. 


2  vi.  4.  5. 


THE  PHOENICIANS  AND  THE  EGYPTIANS. 


1C9 


ized,  it  seems  wholly  inexplicable.  But  if  Aiolos  were 
an  immigrant  who  never  lost  his  foreign  character,  or 
if  he  were  the  famous  foreign  sire  or  ancestor  of  men 
who  acquired  sovereignties  in  Greece  ;  or,  thirdly,  if  he 
were  only  a  mythical  formation,  representing  the  for- 
eign paternity  of  a  group  of  distinguished  men  who 
had  cast  their  lot  in  that  country,  then  nothing  can  be 
more  in  keeping  with  the  general  method  of  the  Poet 
than  that,  just  as  he  cuts  the  thread  which  connects 
the  Pelopids  with  Tantalos  (and,  in  the  preternatural 
order,  the  thread  which  connects  Demeter  with  Perse- 
phone), so  he  should  cut  the  thread  which  connects 
the  Aiolids  with  Aiolos. 

Again,  observe  the  link  supplied  by  horse-breeding, 
and  by  the  introduction  of  the  horse  into  the  Games. 
Two  generations  before  the  Troica,  Augeias,  a  reputed 
Aiolid,  holds  Games  in  Elis,1  probably  at  what  was 
afterwards  Olympia :  and  at  these  Games  there  were 
chariot-races :  and  it  is  in  direct  connection  with 
Games  that  all  which  relates  to  horses  is  placed  under 
the  sanction  of  Poseidon,2  whom  tradition  so  long  con- 
nected with  the  Olympian  contests.3  Eumelos,  an 
Aiolid,  has  the  finest  mortal  horses  of  the  army.4  The 
Trojans,  who  had  JEolian  relations,  are  famous  for 
their  horses.  Sisuphos,  an  Aiolid,  reigns  in  Corinth  :  5 
and  this  is  one  of  the  districts  where  Poseidon  strives 
against  another  deity  for  the  sovereign  worship,6  and 
obtains  it  as  far  as  the  low  ground  is  concerned.7 

i  II.  xi.  699-702.  2  ii.  xxiii.  581-585. 

3  Pindar,  in  the  Olympic  Odes.  4  II.  ii.  763. 

5  II.  vi.  153.  6  Pind.  01.  xiii.  4. 

7  For  a  large  collection  of  particulars  about  Poseidon,  see  Gerhard, 
Ursprung,  &c,  des  Poseidon,  in  the  Berlin  Transactions  ;  and  Preller, 
Gr.  Mythologie,  vol.  i.  p.  452. 


140 


JUYENTUS  MUNDI. 


If  then  Aiolos  was  foreign,  and  was  connected  with 
Poseidon,  he  could  hardly  be  other  than  Phoenician. 
We  turn  then  to  those  books  of  the  Odyssey  which 
we  have  found  to  have  been  constructed  out  of  Phoe- 
nician materials.  And  here  we  meet  him,  exactly  such 
as  we  might  have  anticipated,  in  consonance  with  the 
foregoing  data.  If  Aiolids,  settled  in  Greece,  had 
brought  the  use  of  the  horse  into  the  Games,  nothing 
could  be  more  natural  than  that  Homer  should  mythi- 
cally connect  Aiolos  with  the  horse  :  accordingly,  even 
in  this  foreign  region,  and  upon  this  sea-girt  isle, 
Aiolos  is  the  son  of  Hippotas,1  a  name  of  Greek  ety- 
mology. If  the  Aiolids  were  sea-borne  to  Greece,  so 
Aiolos  dwells  in  a  sea-island,  and  is  the  guardian  of 
the  winds.  If  they  were  a  large  variety  of  houses  from 
one  ancestor,  either  real  or  supposed,  so  we  find  him 
supplied  with  six  prolific  pairs  of  children :  brothers 
and  sisters,  coupled  together  in  a  way  which  was  alien 
to  Greek  manners,  but  which  we  may,  reasoning  from 
analogy,  suppose  to  have  been  much  more  agreeable  to 
Phoenician  customs  and  ideas.  If  the  actual  or  ideal 
person  represented  in  Greece  by  the  name  of  Aiolos 
was  popularly  taken  to  be  connected  with  the  ruling 
houses  of  Greece,  and  with  Troy,  then  it  is  quite 
natural  that  he  should  feel  an  interest  in  the  Trojan 
War.  Accordingly,  the  Aiolos  of  the  Odyssey  inquires 
minutely  of  Odysseus  about  both  Troy  and  the  Greeks  :  2 
which,  be  it  observed,  neither  Kirke  nor  Calypso  does, 
nor  does  any  other  of  the  foreign  personages  encoun- 
tered by  Odysseus  in  his  tour. 

I  suppose,  then,  that  the  Aiolos  of  the  Tenth  Odyssey 


i  Od.  x.  1-4. 


2  Od.  x.  14-16. 


THE  PHCENICIANS  AND  THE  EGYPTIANS.  14l  - 

is  the  ancestor,  real  or  reputed,  of  the  Aiolid  houses 
of  Greece  named  in  Homer ;  and  I  remark  with  some 
confidence,  that  if  he  is  not  this,  he  is  a  personage 
wholly  unaccountable  and  unintelligible. 

This  somewhat  lengthened  though  inadequate  state- 
ment will,  I  hope,  appear  to  be  justified,  when  it  is 
remembered  that  the  historical  question,  which  under 
the  legendary  veil  invites  investigation,  is  one  of 
extreme  interest:  it  is  the  question  of  the  amount, 
the  nature,  and  the  channels  of  the  earliest  powerful 
Semitic  influence  upon  an  Aryan  or  Japhetic  people. 

And  this  leads  me  to  my  concluding  point  in  the 
present  argument.  It  may  naturally  be  asked,  is  there 
anything  in  the  name  Aiolos,  which  is  a  Greek  name 
and  perhaps  a  mythical  one,  to  account  for  its  being 
applied  by  Homer  to  Phoenician  or  Semitic  families  ? 
This  question  has  been  considered  by  Dr.  Hahn,1  who 
offers  his  solution  of  it.  He  observes  that,  among 
many  nations,  warriors  have  been  tattooed,  to  make 
them  look  terrible  :  and  that  a  tattooed  man  might  very 
well  be  called  Aiolos,  or  4  variegated.'  He  thinks, 
therefore,  that  the  name  Aiolos,  which  ran,  as  we  see, 
wholly  in  the  ruling  class,  meant  a  warrior. 

Without  denying  the  ingenuity  of  this  hypothesis, 
I  offer  another  :  for  I  feel  that  Dr.  Hahn's  interpreta- 
tion is  scarcely  applicable  to  the  Greeks  of  Homer. 
Among  them  we  hear  nothing  whatever  of  tattooing ; 
nor  is  the  name  Aiolos,  with  its  derivatives,  particularly 
attached  to  warriors ;  nor  have  we  reason  to  suppose 
that  the  Phoenicians  were  in  any  manner  superior 
to  Hellenes  in  war,  however  they  may  have  acted 


i  Hahn,  Alb.  Stud.  p.  247. 


142 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


as  teachers,  or  as  forerunners,  in  arts  and  knowl- 
edge. 

I  lean  to  another  explanation  of  the  name,  which 
appears  to  me  very  simple  and  sufficient.  I  find  it 
in  a  fact  stated  incidentally  by  Professor  Rawlinson.1 
He  tells  us  that,  among  the  Persians,  dresses  were  not 
often  patterned,  but  depended  generally  for  their  effect 
on  make  and  uniform  color  only.  And  he  adds,  4  In 
\  all  these  respects  we  observe  a  remarkable  contrast 
between  the  Aryan  and  the  Semitic  races,  extreme 
simplicity  characterizing  the  one,  while  the  most  elab- 
orate ornamentation  was  affected  by  the  other.' 

If  this  were  so,  then  nothing  could  be  more  natural 
than  that  when  a  few  prominent  and  conspicuous  per- 
sons from  a  Semitic  country  came  to  settle  in  Greece, 
and  especially  when  they  held  there  a  position  and 
attitude  of  superiority,  they  should  bring  with  them  the 
customs  and  dress  of  their  country,  and  that  to  them, 
in  respect  of  the  style  of  their  habiliments,  the  name  of 
Aiolos,  meaning  patterned  or  variegated,  should  attach. 

Let  our  line  of  thought  now  enter  upon  a  somewhat 
wider  field. 

If  an  empire,  connected  with  the  Phoenician  name, 
had  already  weighed  upon  Greece  within  the  memory 
of  man  ;  if  Phoenicians,  very  probably  officers  of  that 
empire,  had  penetrated  the  country  at  a  number  of 
points,  and  had  usually  been  able,  wherever  they  ap- 
peared, to  obtain  the  ruling  power  ;  we  can  have  no 
cause  to  wonder  that  Homer  should  have  regarded 
them  as  a  great  power  in  the  past,  even  if  to  the 
Greeks  of  his  day  they  were  chiefly  known  as  mer- 
chants or  as  freebooters.    Hence  we  can  be  at  no  loss 

1  Ancient  Monarchies,  vol.  iv.  p.  326. 


THE  PHOENICIANS  AND  THE  EGYPTIANS.  143 

to  comprehend  how  it  is  that  his  epithets  for  them, 
oloophrones,  olophoi'a  eidotes,  agauoi,  go  much 
beyond  what  was  necessary  to  describe  the  astute  man 
of  business,  or  even  the  daring  kidnapper. 

The  detection,  if  it  be  a  real  one,  of  these  powerful 
Semitic  influences,  both  in  the  Greece  of  Homer,  and 
as  they  had  operated  before  his  time,  opens  a  new 
perspective  into  the  ancient  history  of  the  world.  The 
knowledge  of  this  history  has  recently  much  advanced, 
through  research  of  many  kinds  in  various  quarters, 
and  especially  through  the  interpretation  of  the  Egyp- 
tian hieroglyphics.  Before  this  region  of  knowledge 
was  unbarred  to  us,  the  poems  of  Homer  were  justly 
regarded,  even  by  those  who  appreciated  the  evidences 
for  their  unity  of  authorship,  as  might  have  been  some 
isle  of  Delos  floating  on  the  sea  of  time,  without  pos- 
sessing root  or  anchor  visible  to  human  eye,  and  with- 
out affording  us  any  data  whereby  we  might  measure 
the  distance  of  the  extraordinary  phenomenon  from  the 
continuous  and  solid  ground,  the  true  fyteigog,  or  con- 
tinent, of  history.  But  now  the  case  is  altered.  Men 
of  learning  think  themselves  to  have  obtained  means 
of  computation,  whereby  they  can  follow  the  annals  of 
Egypt,  and,  in  a  degree,  of  the  countries  related  to  it, 
upwards,  for  thousands  of  years  before  the  Advent,  along 
the  stream  of  time.  So  far  as  I  understand  the  matter, 
modern  Egyptology  adopts  in  general  the  chronological 
computations  of  the  priest  Manetho,  as  sufficiently 
corroborated  by  the  deciphered  records  of  the  country. 
For  myself,  I  do  not  understand  by  what  certain  crite- 
rion Manetho  could  distinguish,  at  the  period  when 
he  wrote,  between  the  contemporaneous  and  the  suc- 
cessive dynasties  of  the  far  olden  time.    It  seems  that 


144 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


he  attempted  it,  and  in  some  cases  refrained  accord- 
ingly from  heaping  together  in  series  all  the  years  of 
all  the  recorded  reigns.  He  may  not  have  been  very 
far  wrong  :  but  how  can  we  know  that  he  was  right  ? 
To  me  the  constant  changes1  of  the  chief  seat  of 
government,  which  are  allowed  to  have  taken  place, 
suggest  the  suspicion  that  there  may  be  more  of  con- 
temporary and  less  of  successive  power  than  is  sup- 
posed, and  that  the  gross  figures  of  the  chronology  may 
be  exaggerated.  But  I  take  them  as  very  rough  approxi- 
mations to  the  truth,  which  doubtless  lies,  not  beyond, 
but  within  them.  And,  so  viewing  them,  it  appears  to 
me  that  the  period  perhaps  has  arrived  when  the  Poems 
of  Homer  may,  for  the  first  time,  be  regarded  as  be- 
coming gradually  susceptible  of  chronological  handling, 
and  when  attempts  may  not  be  hopeless  to  give  them 
their  approximate  if  not  exact  place  in  relation  to  the 
main  chain  of  events,  which  marks  for  those  ancient 
times  the  central  movement  of  the  history  of  man. 

And  this  with  reference  firstly  to  Phoenicia  ;  se- 
condly and  principally  to  Egypt ;  which,  as  I  have 
shown,  the  Greeks  of  that  early  day  could  hardly  have 
the  means  of  distinguishing  from  Phoenicia  with  regu- 
larity or  precision. 

It  is  plain,  from  both  the  Poems,  that,  at  the  epoch 
of  the  Troica,  Sidon  was  in  its  vigor.  The  Sidonians 
are  mentioned  apart  from  Phoinike,  in  the  list  of 
the  countries  which  Menelaos  visited.2  Here,  as  we 
find,  were  produced  the  noblest  works  of  metallic  art;3 
here  the  richly  embroidered  robes.4  From  the  king 
of  Sidon  (who  has  the  poetical  name  of  Phaidimos) 

1  Le  Normant,  Histoire  Ancienne  de  FOrient,  Paris,  1868,  vol.  i. 
p.  187. 

2  Od.  iv.  84.  a  Qd.  iv.  617.  *  n.  vi,  290. 


THE  PHOENICIANS  AND  THE  EGYPTIANS.  145 

Menelaos  receives  a  noble  gift.1  And  some  of 
Homer's  Phoenician  personages  are  also  called  Si- 
donian. 

Now  the  period  of  the  Sidonian  supremacy  closed, 
as  we  are  told,  with  the  razing  of  that  city  by  the 
Philistines  in  the  year  1209  b.c.2  Then  began  the 
supremacy  of  Tyre  ;  a  city  of  which  we  have  no  indi- 
cation throughout  the  poems,  unless  we  may  be  thought 
to  find  one  in  the  name  of  Turo,3  the  grandmother  of 
Nestor.  From  many  signs  it  appears  that  Turo  must 
have  been  Phoenician.  But  Homer  tells  nothing, 
knows  nothing,  of  a  Tyrian.  It  seems  pretty  clear, 
then,  that  the  epoch  of  the  War,  and  probably  of  the 
Poems,  must  have  been  antecedent  to  the  fall  of  Sidon, 
reputed  to  have  taken  place  in  1209  B.C.  I  do  not  here 
attempt  to  enter  into  the  complicated  questions  with 
reference  to  the  succession,  juxtaposition,  and  inter- 
mixture of  races  in  Phoenicia,  where  all  the  three  great 
families  of  Noachian  man  seem  to  come  in  turn  upon 
the  stage  ;  but  I  simply  treat  their  influence  as  a  Se- 
mitic influence,  on  the  evidence  of  their  Semitic  tongue, 
and  in  conformity  I  believe  with  the  general  judgment 
of  persons  entitled  to  authority. 

Now  with  respect  to  Egypt.  Ample  proof  is  afforded 
by  the  verse  of  Homer  that  the  Greeks  of  the  Troic 
period  had  for  their  proper  national  name  the  name  of 
Achaians.  We  also  see  very  clearly  that  it  had  come 
into  vogue  but  one  or  two  generations  before  the 
Troic  a.  We  know  that  it  lost  its  hold  as  a  national 
name  at,  if  not  before,  the  conquest  of  the  Heracleidai, 
two  or  three  generations  later. 

i  Od.  iv.  617  ;  xv.  117.  2  Le  Normant,  vol.  ii.  p.  286 

3  Od.  xi.  235. 
10 


146 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


At  the  end  of  the  nineteenth  Egyptian  Dynasty,1 
and  with  the  reputed  date  of  the  fourteenth  century 
before  Christ,  under  Merephtah,  successor  of  Kham- 
ses  II  or  Sesostris,  it  appears  from  the  inscriptions  that 
the  people  of  Libya  and  of  the  North,  who  had  formerly 
succumbed  to  the  Egyptian  power,  effected  an  invasion 
of  that  country  in  return.  In  this  invasion  participated, 
among  others,  Achaians  of  the  Peloponnesos,  and  La- 
konians.  They  made  great  havoc  in  the  country  ; 
but  a  great  battle  was  fought,  in  which  they  were 
entirely  defeated,  and  their  enterprise  was  broken  up. 

It  seems  in  a  high  degree  probable,  that  this  invasion 
occurred  during  the  period  which  I  have  described 
as  defining  the  prevalence  of  the  Achaian  name,  and 
the  duration  of  the  supremacy  of  that  noble  race  of 
Greeks. 

It  is  much  more  likely  that  the  effort  was  made  be- 
fore the  War  of  Troy,  than  after  it ;  for  the  condition 
of  Greece  was  then  less  impaired  by  exhaustion  and 
by  internal  revolutions.  We  have  no  means  of  saying 
whether,  so  far  as  Greece  was  concerned,  it  was  a  na- 
tional, or  only  a  local  effort.  It  is  probable  that  Crete 
may  have  been  its  base  :  that  island  was  nearest  to 
Egypt ;  it  had  a  strong  Phoenician  element,  and  prob- 
ably a  considerable  marine  ;  and  in  one  of  the  fictions 
of  the  pseud-Odysseus,  when  representing  himself  as 
a  Cretan  of  high  rank,  he  declares  that  he  undertook 
a  voyage  to  Egypt,2  an  effort  in  navigation  of  which  we 
hear  in  no  other  quarter. 

We  need  feel  no  surprise  at  the  silence  of  Homer 
with  respect  to  this  daring  enterprise.    The  Poet,  fre- 


1  Le  Normant,  ii.  286. 


2  Od.  xiv.  246. 


THE  PHOENICIANS  AND  THE  EGYPTIANS.  14T 

quent  and  even  copious  in  his  allusions  to  the  minor 
legends  of  his  country,  seems  almost  jealous  of  the 
greater  ones.  The  ship  Argo  is  mentioned  but  once 
in  the  Poems  ; 1  the  allusions  to  the  war  of  Thebes  are 
slight.  But  if  little  careful  to  mix  with  his  own  great 
theme  the  records  of  what  he  might  deem  rival  his- 
tories, in  a  case  like  this  invasion,  another  and  more 
powerful  order  of  motives  would  come  into  play.  He 
sang  for  the  glory  of  Greece  ;  and  as  on  this  occasion, 
sharing  the  disastrous  fate  of  their  Libyan  allies,  his 
countrymen  were  utterly  worsted  by  the  foreigner,  it 
was  no  fit  subject  for  his  minstrelsy.  Yet  it  is  very 
remarkable  that  in  the  fictitious  narrative  just  made, 
the  expedition  takes  the  form  of  an  invasion.  Great 
havoc  at  first  takes  place.2  But  the  Egyptians  are 
roused  ;  a  battle  is  fought ;  the  invaders  are  slain  or 
taken ;  a  pretty  exact  counterpart,  although  in  minia- 
ture, of  the  history  of  the  actual  invasion,  as  it  ap- 
pears in  the  Egyptian  records. 

Under  Thouthmes  III,3  of  what  is  termed  the  eigh- 
teenth dynasty,  and  at  a  date  taken  to  be  about  1600 
B.C.,  the  military  power  of  Egypt  reached  its  zenith. 
The  Empire  extended  east  and  northwards  over  Mes- 
opotamia, Syria,  Phoenicia,  and  even  into  Armenia. 
This  military  dominion  was  so  constructed  as  to  recog- 
nize the  local  governments,  under  the  suzerainty  of  the 
Pharaohs.  Among  the  supports  of  its  power  was  a 
fleet,4  which  established  its  supremacy  in  the  Medi- 
terranean waters.  There  can  be  little  doubt  that  this 
fleet  was,  both  in  its  men  and  material,  Phoenician. 


i  Od.  xii.  70. 

3  Le  Normant,  ii.  239. 


2  Od.  xiv.  263. 

4  Le  Normant,  ii.  246. 


148 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


An  inscription  at  Karnak  1  shows  that  it  conquered 
Crete,  the  islands  of  the  Archipelago,  and  portions  of 
the  coast,  at  least  of  Greece  and  Asia  Minor.  It  pene- 
trated into  the  Black  Sea  ;  and  it  acted  on  the  popula- 
tions of  the  Libyan  coast.  Centuries  appear  to  have 
passed  away  before  this  empire,  probably  not  too  strin- 
gent in  its  action,  crumbled  into  fragments.  But  it 
subsisted  amid  much  vicissitude.  In  1462  B.C.  the 
nineteenth  dynasty  is  reckoned  to  commence.  It 
seems  doubtful  whether  the  maritime  supremacy, 
which  there  was  no  native  marine  able  to  maintain, 
had  not  already  dwindled  to  nothing.  The  second 
monarch  of  this  dynasty,  Seti  I.,  was  a  great  warrior; 
but  he  made  no  effort  to  retrieve  the  dominion  of  the 
sea. 

Here  I  may  venture  conjecturally  on  the  following 
observations.  The  Egyptian  history  of  the  maritime 
conquests  of  Thouthmes  III,  if  we  are  allowed  the 
almost  inevitable  assumption  that  the  nautical  instru- 
ment for  creating  the  supremacy  was  Phoenician,2 
reads  like  an  account  in  other  words  of  what  Thucy- 
dides  has  slightly  but  firmly  sketched  from  general 
tradition,  and  what  we  are  enabled  to  gather  with  a 
considerable  amount  of  proof  from  Homer,  respecting 
the  empire  of  Minos  in  Crete,  over  the  Archipelago, 
and  on  the  continent  of  Greece. 

But  the  empire  by  sea  soon  vanished ;  while  the 
empire  by  land,  extending  it  appears  into  Asia  Minor, 
continued,  though  in  varying  phases,  to  subsist.  There 

1  Le  Norman  t,  ii.  247. 

2  In  much  later  times  we  find  Phoenicia  performing  much  the  same 
office  for  the  Persian  king.    Herod,  iii.  19 ;  vii.  44. 


THE  PHCENICIANS  AND  THE  EGYPTIANS.  149 

is  at  least  one  indication  gathered  from  Homer  and 
the  general  tradition  jointly,  which  would  lead  to  the 
conclusion  that  the  War  of  Troy  took  place  after 
the  fall  of  the  first,  but  before  the  disappearance  of 
the  second,  portion  of  the  Egyptian  power.  The 
Poems  are  altogether  opposed  to  any  idea  that  a 
maritime  Egyptian  empire  still  existed.  Crete,  appar- 
ently its  old  head-quarter,  was  not  at  the  Troic  period 
the  centre  of  prevailing  power  that  it  had  been  before. 
But  Memnon  was  among  the  allies  of  Troy  ; 1  and 
all  tradition  reports  that  Memnon  was  Egyptian.  It 
may  perhaps  be  worth  noting,  that  the  Memnon  of 
Homer  is  gifted  with  the  highest  personal  beauty,  and 
that  this  honor  would  not  have  been  awarded  by  the 
Poet,  who  above  all  things  admired  the  lighter  hair 
and  complexion,  to  the  swarthy,  nay  tawny,  natives 
of  the  Egypt  of  our  geography.  Is  it  not  also  highly 
improbable  that  Priam,  whose  list  of  allies  in  the 
Catalogue  stops  at  Lycia  and  Caria,  should  have  been 
able  to  draw  an  auxiliary  force  from  so  great  a  dis- 
tance ?  But  if  the  political  Egypt,  the  Egyptian  su- 
premacy or  empire  of  that  day,  reached  as  far  as 
Armenia  or  Asia  Minor,  the  difficulty  disappears  at 
once  ;  from  such  a  region  Memnon  might  have  come, 
and  the  account  of  Homer,  together  with  the  later 
tradition,  becomes  natural  and  intelligible. 

In  the  year  1311  B.C.,  which  is  considered  as  a  date 
astronomically  ascertained,2  Rhamses  III,  the  last  great 
military  monarch  of  Egypt,  came  to  the  throne.  Meso- 
potamia, however,  was  under  Egyptian  rule  as  late  as 
1150  B.C. 


i  Od.  xi.  522. 


2  Le  Normant,  p.  200. 


150 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


The  time  may  be  at  hand,  when,  from  further  inves- 
tigations, it  will  be  possible  to  define  with  greater  pre- 
cision those  periods  of  the  Egyptian  chronology  to 
which  the  Homeric  Poems,  and  their  subject,  thus 
appear  to  be  related. 

In  the  mean  time  it  may  reasonably  be  pointed  out 1 
that  the  discoveries  already  made  tend  to  show  that 
those  inquirers  have  not  been  wrong,  who  have  as- 
signed the  greatest  measure  of  antiquity,  and  of  his- 
torical character,  to  the  works  of  Homer. 

1  Le  Normant,  p.  302. 


» 


CHAPTER  VI. 


On  the  Title  '  Anax  Andron.' 

There  is  a  substantial  distinction  between  titles,  and 
epithets  descriptive  of  station  or  office.  Titles  are  in 
effect  that  class  of  descriptions  which  have  been  grad- 
ually accepted  by  society  and  established  in  common 
usage  for  the  purpose  of  indicating  a  certain  rank  or 
function,  just  as  a  given  weight  and  form  of  the  pre- 
cious metals  is  appointed  by  law  or  custom  to  indicate 
a  certain  value.  In  both  cases  the  symbol,  becoming 
familiar  to  the  minds  of  all,  is  accepted  in  common  use 
without  examination. 

By  titles,  and  also  by  epithets,  I  understand,  for  the 
present  purpose,  either  adjectives  or  substantives,  as  the 
case  may  be. 

Epithets,  or  descriptive  phrases,  may  by  degrees  grow 
into  titles :  and  it  is  probable  that  all  titles,  properly  so 
called  (I  do  not  now  speak  of  those  denoting  relation- 
ship), may  begin  in  descriptive  phrases. 

One  sign  of  a  title  is,  that  it  can  either  be  combined 
with  the  name  of  the  pers©n  to  whom  it  belongs,  or 
substituted  for  it. 


152 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


In  Homer,  the  substantives  hegemones,  aristees, 
and  the  adjectives  skeptouchoi  (of  kings),  theioi 
(of  bards),  are  epithets  or  descriptive  phrases.  Again, 
with  respect  to  individuals,  echephron  (for  Pene- 
lope), pepnumenos  (for  Telemachos) ,  polumetis 
(for  Odysseus),  are  descriptive  phrases.  But  B  as  il- 
eus, Basileia,  for  king  and  queen,  are  titles.  Anax 
sometimes  means  ruler  or  lord,  somewhat  vaguely,  as 
a  title  ;  sometimes  noble,  as  a  class ;  sometimes  lord, 
as  a  master  or  proprietor,  for  example,  of  slaves  or 
animals.  It  differs  from  Basileus  in  these  particu- 
lars :  first,  that  it  is  more  rarely  used  as  a  title  ;  sec- 
ondly, that,  while  both  indicate  a  superiority,  the  idea 
conveyed  by  anax  leans  to  ownership  and  absolute 
command,  while  the  Basileus  is  a  ruler  not  an  owner, 
a  ruler  of  freemen  organized  under  the  social  bond, 
and  limited  by  civil  right  which  he  is  himself  bound 
to  observe. 

As  a  designation  of  dignity,  Basileus  is  the  high- 
er, as  well  as  the  more  definite.  The  word  nearest  to 
it  is  koiranos;  but  this  has  hardly,  in  Homer,  set- 
tled down  into  a  title.  The  ruling  office  is  also  more 
vaguely  indicated  by  the  expressions  xqs/ojv,  and  noi^v 
lawv,  shepherd  of  the  people.  Basileus  is  well  ren- 
dered by  '  king:'  anax  by  6  lord,'  a  word  at  once 
wider,  more  absolute,  and  less  elevated  in  the  sense  it 
conveys. 

But  we  find  in  Homer  the  remarkable  phrase  anax 
andron,  lord  of  men;  and  this  is  used,  not  descrip- 
tively, but,  beyond  all  question,  as  a  title.  Now,  as  the 
word  anax  has  no  reference  to  reciprocal  rights  and 
duties,  it  is  very  remarkable  that  we  should  find  it  thus 
used  with  regard  to  relations  towards  men,  and  evi- 


ON  THE  TITLE  '  ANAX  ANDRON.' 


153 


dently  freemen,  in  a  title  enjoyed  by  certain  individ- 
uals. The  physiognomy  of  the  phrase,  so  to  speak,  is 
not  that  of  Hellenic  society ;  for  Hellenic  society  was 
already  founded  in  rights.  It  suggests  therefore  a 
history  of  its  own,  and  a  character  either  foreign,  or 
archaic,  or  both. 

The  facts  relating  to  the  use  of  this  phrase  are  as 
follows :  — 

It  is  applied  to  Agamemnon  forty-four  times  in  the 
Iliad,  and  twice  in  the  Odyssey. 
It  is  also  applied  to 

^neas,  II.  v.  311.  Augeias,  II.  xi.  701,  739. 

Euphetes,  II.  xv.  532.  Eumelos,  II.  xxiii.  288. 

Anchises,  II.  v.  268. 

Thus  then  anaxandronisa  stock  or  staple  phrase 
for  Agamemnon.  Yet  it  is  applied  to  five  other  per- 
sons, all  of  them  sovereigns ;  but  none  of  them  at  all 
approaching  Agamemnon  in  point  either  of  personal 
eminence,  or  of  power.  It  is  not  therefore  on  account 
of  his  personal  eminence  or  of  his  power  that  the  title 
is  bestowed  on  Agamemnon. 

But  again.  While  it  is  given  thus  frequently  to 
Agamemnon,  it  is  given  but  once  to  four  of  the  other 
five,  and  but  twice  to  Augeias.  One  of  these  person- 
ages, Euphetes,  is  named  but  once  in  the  Poems,1  and 
then  he  is  named  with  the  title.  Augeias  (except  once 
in  a  patronymic)  is  only  mentioned  twice,2  in  the 
legend  of  the  Eleventh  Iliad ;  and  twice  with  the  title. 
Eumelos  has  the  title  once,  out  of  five  passages  in 
which  he  is  named.  Anchises  once  only,  out  of  thir- 
teen.   But  iEneas  is  very  frequently  named  in  the 


i  II.  xv.  532. 


2  H.  xi.  700,  738. 


154 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


Poem,  and  yet  never  with  the  title  except  once.  He 
appears  to  hold  it  as  heir-apparent  to  his  father's 
throne ;  and  his  possession  of  it  marks  its  hereditary 
character  under  such  circumstances. 

It  is  to  be  noticed,  that  all  the  six  names  to  which 
Homer  annexes  the  title  are  virtually  of  the  same 
metrical  value  in  the  place  of  the  verse  where  it  is 
almost  invariably  so  annexed.  The  same  observation 
applies  to  the  word  Atreides  joined  with  it  in  II.  i.  7. 
At  first  sight,  then,  it  might  appear  that  metrical  con- 
venience had  prompted  the  use  of  the  phrase.  But 
then, 

1.  Two  of  the  six  names,  in  their  simpler  forms, 
Aineas  and  Augeas,  are  modified  into  Aineias  and 
Augeias  in  order  to  fall  in  with  the  title. 

2.  It  cannot  be  metrical  convenience  which  gives  it 
so  very  frequently  to  Agamemnon,  and  so  rarely  to  the 
others. 

3.  There  are  at  least  from  thirty  to  forty  names 
of  equivalent  metrical  value  in  the  Poems,  including 
many  princes,  heroes,  and  notable  persons,  which  never 
receive  the  title.  Among  these  are,  of  the  living, 
Patroclos,  Sarpedon,  Antenor,  Diomedes,  Agapenor, 
Menelaos,  Aigisthos ;  and  of  the  dead,  Amphion,  Hera- 
cles, Eurustheus,  Adrestos,  Rhadamanthos,  Meleagros. 

Homer  never  inflects  the  title,  giving  it  always  in 
the  nominative.  He  never  severs  the  phrase  by  tmesis, 
except  once  only,  through  inserting  the  copulative  par- 
ticle ts.  Once,  in  II.  i.  7,  it  lies  between  the  second 
and  fourth  foot  of  the  verse  ;  in  every  other  case  it  is 
found  between  the  third  and  fifth.  Some  of  these  par- 
ticulars may  be  held,  according  to  the  laws  of  Homeric 
use,  to  add  dignity  to  the  title.    In  illustration  of  this 


ON  THE  TITLE  4  ANAX  ANDRON.' 


155 


proposition,  I  will  observe  that,  conversely,  in  the  few 
instances  where  the  Poet  introduces  himself  into  the 
verse,  he  never  once  uses  the  nominative.  Again, 
Enosicthonis  used  for  Poseidon  forty  times  ;  thirty- 
nine  of  them  in  the  nominative.  Diogenes  is  found 
in  the  nominative  and  vocative  only.  The  masculine 
kudistos  is  used  sixteen  times,  all  in  the  vocative. 
Eurucreion  twelve  times,  only  in  the  nominative. 

The  phrase  anax  andron  entirely  disappears  from 
use  after  Homer. 

Let  us  now  look  to  particulars  connected  with  the 
application  of  the  phrase  to  each  of  the  six  names 
severally,  in  order  to  discover  the  thread,  if  there  be 
one,  on  which  in  common  all  are  hung. 

I.  Agamemnon. 

The  sovereign  of  all  the  Greeks  is  nowhere  described 
by  personal  epithets  of  pointed  characteristic  force. 
Eight  times  he  is  called  by  the  epithet  dios,  which 
indicates  some  specialty  of  excellence,  and  which  was 
fairly  due  to  his  prominence  whether  among  rulers  or 
among  warriors.  Generally  he  is  marked  either  by  the 
patronymic,  which  is  simply  historical,  or  by  what  may 
be  called  official  epithets,  creion,  eurucreion,  poi- 
men  laon.  But  the  staple  or  stock  phrase  is  anax 
andron. 

I  have  already  given  a  reason  why  this  cannot  be  on 
account  of  his  great  power  and  sway.  Again,  the  pas- 
sages which  most  forcibly  describe  these  are  the  lines 
about  the  Sceptre  in  II.  ii.  100-108,  and  that  which  gives 
him  his  place  in  the  Catalogue,  II.  ii.  576-580.  In 
these  he  is  not  called  anax  andron,  but  creion. 
In  two  other  passages  of  the  Poem  he  is  personally 


156 


JUYENTUS  MUNDI. 


glorified  :  as  to  his  appearance  in  II.  ii.  477-483,  and  as 
to  his  arming  in  II.  xi.  15-46.  In  neither  of  these  is  he 
an  ax  andron.  Neither  corporal  distinctions,  then, 
nor  official  position  thus  far  appear  to  supply  a  basis 
for  the  phrase.  Yet  the  very  emphatic  use  of  it  after 
the  proper  name  in  the  prefatory  passage  of  the  Poem, 
which  contains  so  much,  as  well  as  its  frequent  reitera- 
tion, prove  its  general  dignity  and  importance.  Again, 
therefore,  it  seems  likely  that  we  are  to  look  somewhere 
in  the  past  for  the  secret  of  its  meaning. 

Unfortunately,  in  the  case  of  this  great  family  of  the 
Pelopidai,  the  past  at  a  certain  point,  and  that  too  one 
soon  reached,  becomes  obscure. 

All  that  Homer  desires  or  intends  us  to  know  of  the 
extraction  of  Agamemnon  is  contained  in  the  famous 
and  very  significant  passage  of  the  Sceptre,  II.  ii.  101- 
108.    Here  we  are  informed  that 

1.  Hephaistos  fashioned  it. 

2.  He  gave  it  to  Zeus. 

3.  Zeus  gave  it  over  to  Hermes  Diactoros,  the  Agent, 
or  Gro-between  ;  or  Ambassador. 

4.  Hermes  gave  it  to  Pelops,  '  the  driver  of  horses.' 

5.  Pelops  gave  it  to  Atreus,  shepherd  of  the  people 

6.  Atreus  dying  left  it  (ihni)  ;  it  remained  or  passed 
over  to  Thuestes,  rich  in  flocks. 

7.  From  Thuestes  in  like  manner  it  was  left  to 
Agamemnon  (leXm). 

8.  It  conveyed  suzerainty  (at  the  least)  over  all 
Greece  and  its  numerous  islands. 

The  first  question  is,  what  are  we  to  say  to  the  theo- 
techny  or  preternatural  machinery  here  introduced  ? 
If  we  are  to  give  it  an  ethnological  meaning,  the  names 


ON  THE  TITLE  '  ANAX  ANDEAN.' 


157 


of  Hephaistos  and  of  Hermes  give  it  a  color  foreign, 
and  such  as  I  have  called  Phoenician.  Little  stress 
could  be  placed  upon  this,  if  it  were  an  isolated  phe- 
nomenon. But  the  sphere  of  the  art  of  Hephaistos,  and 
of  the  general  activity  of  Hermes,  lies  so  completely 
beyond  the  limits  of  Greece,  that  I  cannot  but  attach 
weight  to  their  names  as  indicating  that,  before  Pelops, 
the  family  had  been  foreign,  and  probably  Asiatic.  The 
passage  also  demonstrates  that  the  starting-point  of  the 
house  is  one  at  which  it  had  attained  to  princely  rank. 

Next,  the  epithet  given  to  Pelops  tends  to  support 
the  tradition,  which  places  him  in  relations  with  the 
Olympian  Games,  and  with  the  god  Poseidon. 

Further ;  Atreus  first  appears  in  the  Pelopid  time  as 
'  shepherd  of  the  (or  a)  people.'  There  is  something  in 
this  phrase  which  seems  to  point  him  out  as  the  first 
head,  in  the  Pelopid  line,  of  a  settled  and  consolidated 
Greek  sovereignty.  The  same  inference  may  be  drawn 
from  the  fact  that  his  name  supplies  the  standing  pat- 
ronymic ;  as  Neleus  supplies  it  to  Nestor.  There  is 
also  some  more  direct  evidence.  Heracles  may  be 
reckoned  as  living  one  generation  and  a  half  before 
the  War,  since  he  has  in  it  both  a  son  and  grandsons ; 
and  Eurustheus,  who  was  his  contemporary,  reigned 
in  Achaic  Argos,  which  afterwards  became  the  seat  of 
the  Pelopid  power.  There  seems  to  be  only  room,  there- 
fore, in  the  natural  course,  for  one  generation  of  sov- 
ereigns in  Achaic  Argos  after  Eurustheus  and  before 
Agamemnon. 

To  this  generation  probably  belong  both  Atreus  and 
Thuestes,  the  father  of  Aigisthos.  In  the  change  of 
phrase  from  fooxs,  '  gave,'  to  slam  and  Homer  may 
seem  to  glance  at  a  departure  from  the  common  line  of 


158 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


direct  succession,  and  a  return  to  it.  Thuestes,  then, 
not  being  in  that  line  (or,  if  we  were  to  suppose  him  in 
it,  being  in  it  only  as  the  brother  of  Agamemnon),  we 
have  but  two  generations  of  ancestry,  and  but  one  of 
established  sovereignty,  given  for  the  house  of  Aga- 
memnon ;  Pelops  having  probably  founded  the  power 
of  the  house,  but  not  placed  it  in  its  fixed  seat,  or  ob- 
tained for  it  the  full  measure  of  acknowledgment  and 
positive  authority. 

We  see  plainly,  from  this  circumstantial  account  of 
the  derivation  of  the  Sceptre,  that  the  Pelopids  did  not 
simply  subvert,  or  succeed  to,  a  prior  dynasty  ;  but  that 
they  held  a  new  dominion,  legitimated,  in  poetic  phrase, 
by  the  gift  of  Zeus.  And  we  know,  from  the  com- 
parison of  dates  and  particulars  already  made,  that  this 
was  the  great  Achaian  dynasty,  having  the  old  Argeian 
dominion  for  its  centre,  but  reaching  much  beyond  its 
bounds,  with  an  undefined  though  acknowledged  su- 
premacy over  Greece  and  its  whole  coronet  of  islands. 

The  joint  and  simultaneous  rise  of  the  Achaian  race, 
and  of  the  house  of  Pelops,  is  well  and  clearly  founded 
in  the  facts  of  the  text :  which,  however,  carries  us  but 
little  farther.  Tradition  asserts  that  Pelops  was  the 
son  of  Tantalos,  and  Tantalos  the  king  of  a  race  of 
Phruges.  Homer  introduces  him  to  us  in  the  Under- 
world, together  with  a  variety  of  personages,  all  of 
whom  have  relations,  in  one  form  or  other,  with  Greece. 
Placing  him  among  such  persons,  he  still  conforms  to 
his  rule  by  not  naming  him  in  the  passage  of  the 
Sceptre ;  since  he  never,  on  any  occasion,  deduces  a 
Greek  dynasty  from  a  confessedly  foreign  ancestor. 

The  nature  of  his  punishment,  pointing  to  some  form 
of  greed  as  his  offence,  is  also  well  assorted  with  the 


ON  THE  TITLE  4  AN  AX  ANDRON. 


159 


tradition  which  represents  him  as  the  last  holder  of 
his  inherited  power,  and  his  son  as  an  immigrant  in  a 
foreign  land. 

We  have  no  means  of  determining,  from  the  Poems, 
whether  Tantalos  was  reputed  to  be  of  divine  descent ; 
but  it  is  far  from  improbable,  since  most  of  those 
among  whom  he  appears  in  the  Odyssey  were  so  de- 
scended. 

Post-Homeric  tradition  makes  Niobe  the  daughter  of 
Tantalos.  The  tradition  of  Niobe  herself  is  recited 
by  Achilles,1  and  from  this  we  may  infer,  first,  her  dig- 
nity and  fame  ;  next,  her  having  relations  with  Greece. 
The  theotechny,  too,  of  the  tradition  exhibits  her  as 
one  of  the  great  of  the  earth;  and  the  term  laous,2 
applied  to  those  who  were  vicariously  punished  for  her 
offence,  evidently  means  her  subjects.  Very  possibly, 
the  epithet  rfixopog,  commending  the  beauty  of  her  hair, 
may  indicate  that  the  Poet  regarded  her  as  a  Greek, 
either  born  or  naturalized. 

Homer  places  the  mourning  Niobe  on  Mount  Sipu- 
los,  near  the  Acheloos ;  and  Pausanias  found  the  re- 
puted tomb  of  Pelops  on  the  summit  of  the  hill.  The 
Phruges  of  Tantalos  are  reputed  to  have  been  a 
Thracian  people.3  Their  name4  appears  even  in  At- 
tica ;  and  a  harbor  in  Elis  was  called  after  Tanta- 


Pelops  is  commonly  said  to  have  gained  the  hand  of 
Hippodameia,  and  the  throne  of  Elis,  by  success  in 
the  chariot-race.  Local  traces  of  him  remained.  He 
was  worshipped  in  a  sanctuary  hard  by  the  temple  of 


los.5 


i  II.  xxiv.  602. 

3.  Strabo,  xii.  p.  579 ;  xiv.  p.  680. 
5  Paus.  V.  xiii.  1-4. 


2  II  xxiv.  611. 
4  Thuc.  ii.  22. 


160 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


Zeus  Olympios  ; 1  and  revered  there  among  heroes,  says 
Pausanias,  as  Zeus  was  among  gods.  He  is  the  re- 
puted founder  or  restorer  of  the  Games  who  raised 
them  to  their  historic  celebrity.  Another  tradition 
brings  him  from  Olenos  into  Elis  ;  no  improbable  indi- 
cation of  his  route  from  the  north.  Nine  islands  off 
the  coast  of  Methana  were  called  the  islands  of  Pelops 
in  the  time  of  Pausanias ; 2  and  we  have  already 
noticed  in  that  quarter  traces  of  the  Achaian  name. 

That  the  Achaians  were  Hellenes,  and  that  they 
rise  to  pre-eminence  with  the  Pelopids,  are  circum- 
stances which  lead  us  to  look  for  further  traces  of  the 
connection.  Now  Strabo 3  seems  to  attach  a  great 
value  to  a  tradition  which  he  repeats,  that  the  Achai- 
ans of  Phthiotis  came  with  Pelops  into  the  Pelopon- 
nesos,  occupied  Laconia,  and  gave  it  the  name  of  Achaic 
Argos ;  and  subsequently,  when  the  Achaians  were 
driven  out  of  Laconia,  they  drove  out  an  Ionian  race 
from  Aigialos,  and  gave  their  name  to  that  region. 
This  account  of  the  journey  of  the  race,  and  of  Pelops, 
is  in  accordance  with  the  traces  we  have  found  in 
Homer  and  elsewhere  of  the  passage  of  the  family  of 
Pelops  towards  the  south,  and  with  the  emergence  of 
the  dynasty  of  Atreus.  It  is  also  in  marked  accord- 
ance with  the  emphatic  application  of  the  Achaian 
name  to  the  inhabitants  of  Phthie,  and  with  the  promi- 
nence that  the  Poet  gives  to  that  district  in  the  War, 
through  its  Myrmidon  soldiery  and  its  illustrious  chief, 
who  are  thus  placed  in  near  relations  with  Agamem- 
non and  his  adherents.  Although  we  have  found  in 
many  places  vestiges  of  the  local  use  of  the  Achaian 


1  Paus.  V.  xiii.  5. 


*  ii.  34. 


3  Bk.  viii.  5,  p.  365. 


ON  THE  TITLE  '  ANAX  ANDRON.' 


161 


name,  this  is  one  of  only  two  where  it  is  expressly  and 
directly  assigned  to  the  inhabitants  of  a  district  as 
such.  The  other  is  in  Crete ;  and  there  no  such  great 
importance  attaches  to  the  statement,  which  exhibits 
them  in  conjunction  with  Dorians  and  other  races. 

History  at  this  point  comes  in  to  our  aid.  Down  to 
the  late  era  of  Polybius,  the  connection  of  the  Achaian 
name  with  Phthie  still  subsisted.  There  were  always 
Achaians  of  Phthiotis ;  and  in  the  year  205  B.C. 
Quintius,  the  Roman  general,  recognized  the  Achai- 
ans, upon  inquiry,  as  the  Thessalian  race.1 

And  the  close  relation  of  this  race  to  the  Pelopids 
is  in  no  respect  more  clear  than  in  this,  that  as  they 
rose,  so  they  fell,  with  that  particular  dynasty.  In  the 
post-Homeric  literature,  all  of  which  follows  the  Dorian 
conquest,  the  Achaian  name  has  ceased  to  be  a  current 
designation  for  the  Greeks. 

We  are  not  entitled,  however,  to  carry  the  connec- 
tion backwards  in  time  beyond  Pelops.  We  may 
reckon  with  confidence  that,  if  Tantalos  had  been 
recognized  as  a  Greek,  he  would  have  been  named  by 
Homer  in  the  line  of  the  ancestry  of  Agamemnon. 

Yet  not  even  the  Heracleid  victors  in  the  struggle 
could  afford  to  let  slip  the  repute  and  credit  of  the 
Achaian  sovereignty.  So  although  Tisamenos,  their 
representative  in  blood,  had  been  expelled,  and  had 
betaken  himself  with  his  followers  to  Aigialos,  his 
tomb  in  aftertimes  was  shown  at  Sparta ;  and  hard  by 
it  the  feast  of  Pheiditia  was  kept:  with  an  explana- 
tory tradition  that  their  fathers,  admonished  by  an 
oracle,  had  fetched  the  remains  of  the  last  Pelopid 


i  Polyb.  xviii.  30-37. 
11 


162 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


sovereign  from  their  home  at  Helike,  in  Achaia.  On 
the  other  hand,  the  Achaians  had  now  set  up  a  legen- 
dary ancestor,  Achaios  by  name,  whose  image  they 
professed  to  exhibit ;  and  along  with  it  they  cherished 
a  tradition,  that  the  family  of  Tisamenos  had  contin- 
ued to  reign  among  them  down  to  the  time  of  Ogugos, 
in  the  third  century  before  Christ,  when  their  league 
was  formed  upon  the  basis  of  democratic  institutions. 
In  neither  quarter  do  we  see  any  such  honor  paid  to 
the  yet  older  dynasty  of  Danaos  or  of  Perseus.  All  this 
seems  to  enhance  the  dignity  of  this  Achaian  sovereign- 
ty, to  which  the  title  of  an  ax  andron  was  attached,  as 
if  it  were  possessed  of  some  peculiar  attribute  which 
it  had  not  received,  and  which  it  did  not  transmit. 

We  have  now  examined  the  proper  import  of  the 
phrase,  and  its  use  in  the  case  of  Agamemnon.  We 
have  found  that  its  groundwork  does  not  lie  either  in 
his  personal  qualities  or  in  his  position  as  general-in- 
chief  or  as  king.  It  appears  to  point  backwards  to  a 
state  of  things  anterior  to  the  constitution  of  Achaian 
society ;  which,  as  we  find  it  in  Homer,  though  imma- 
ture in  its  forms  of  administration,  was  profoundly 
penetrated  with  a  political  spirit,  and  had  completely 
possessed  itself  of  the  substance  of  civil  right,  though 
not  in  the  form  of  law.  It  suggests,  then,  a  chief- 
taincy or  hereditary  superiority,  older  than  the  settle- 
ment of  the  family  in  its  present  form  and  power,  and, 
whether  founded  in  blood  or  otherwise,  having  refer- 
ence to  an  origin  in  time  and  place  beyond  the  limit  of 
Greek  history,  even  in  that  wide  sense  of  the  phrase 
in  which  we  apply  it  to  the  chronicles  of  Homer. 

Let  us  now  see  what  further  lights  can  be  supplied 
from  the  cases  of  the  five  personages  who  share  this 
title  with  Agamemnon. 


ON  THE  TITLE  '  ANAX  ANDRON.' 


163 


II.  Anchises,  and  III.  .ZEneas. 

If  the  strong  sense  of  nationality  in  Homer  has  led 
him  everywhere  to  keep  back  from  his  hearers  what 
he  may  have  known  or  heard  of  a  foreign  origin  for 
any  Greek  race  or  family,  it  seems  plain  that  least  of 
all  would  he  be  disposed  to  lift  the  veil  in  the  case  of 
a  people  whom  the  Greeks  had  conquered,  and  whose 
great  chieftains  especially  he  exhibits  throughout  in 
marked  though  skilfully  softened  and  disguised  in- 
feriority. 

As  the  Helloi  are  first  introduced  to  us  in  the 
mountains  above  Thessaly,  so  the  Dardanians  appear 
in  the  recesses  of  Ida,  above  the  Ilian  plain.  Dardanos 
is  expressly  declared  to  be  the  son  of  Zeus ;  as  Aga- 
memnon may  probably  have  been  his  reputed  descend- 
ant. On  the  one  side  we  have  Zeus,  with  the  Helloi 
for  his  prophets :  on  the  other,  Zeus  of  Ida,  Zeus 
Idaios.  The  term  anax  andron  applied  to  a  father 
and  his  son,  both  living,  shows  the  derivative  and  more 
than  hereditary  character  of  the  title,  and  supports  the 
hypothesis  that  it  springs  from  some  remote  fountain- 
head.  But  why  is  it  that,  given  both  to  Anchises  and 
^Eneas,  it  is  not  given  to  Priam  or  to  any  of  his  family  ? 
Here  there  is  opened  to  us  a  curious  field  of  inquiry. 

Certain  facts  are  on  the  face  of  the  Poems. 

Priam1  had,  before  the  war,  been  a  potentate,  ex- 
celling all  in  that  vicinity.  Besides  the  Allies,  and 
besides  his  own  troops  under  the  command  of  Hector, 
who  are  described  in  terms  somewhat  like  those  applied 
to  the  troops  of  Agamemnon  in  the  Greek  army,  the 


i  II.  xxiv.  543-546. 


164 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


Dardanians  appear  as  a  separate  contingent ;  and  there 
are  three  other  military  contingents,1  one  certainly,  but 
perhaps  all,  included  under  the  name  of  Troes,  forming 
the  third,  fourth,  and  fifth  divisions  of  the  army.  The 
King  of  Troy,  then,  probably  held  a  position  less 
powerful  indeed,  yet  resembling  that  of  Agamemnon 
in  having,  besides  his  immediate  subjects,  various 
princes  under  his  suzerainty. 

There  was  at  Troy  an  Union  or  Chamber  of  dr^ioye- 
Qovreg?  which  occupied  the  same  relative  place  as  the 
Bovh]  or  Council  among  the  Greeks.  It  was  composed 
of  royal  and  princely  persons ;  yet  Anchises  appears 
neither  in  this  body,  nor  anywhere  upon  the  scene  of 
the  poem.  It  is  not  directly  stated  that  he  was  alive  ; 
yet  it  seems  to  be  assumed.3  If  he  lived,  his  absence 
from  the  Council  is  remarkable,  as  his  dominions  were 
engaged  in  the  war,  and  iEneas,  before  he  came  to 
Troy,  had  only  been  rescued  by  Poseidon  from  the 
hands  of  Achilles.4  This  prince  is  never  spoken  of  as 
in  possession  of  his  inheritance. 

The  sovereignty  held  by  Anchises  was  the  older  of 
the  two ;  for  Dardania  was  built  by  Dardanos,5  Troy 
apparently  by  his  grandson  Tros,  or  his  great-grandson 
Ilos.  Priam  was  the  great-grandson  of  Tros  through 
Ilos  and  Laomedon,  Anchises  through  Assaracos  and 
Capus.  We  cannot  judge  with  certainty  from  this 
genealogy,  the  longest  and  most  detailed  in  the  Poems, 
whether  the  branch  of  Ilos  or  that  of  Assaracos  was  the 
younger.  But  the  presumption  arising  out  of  his  re- 
moval from  the  original  seat  into  the  plain  seems  to  be 


i  II.  ii.  824-839.  2  n.  iii.  146-148. 

4  II.  xx.  90-93 ;  128-131. 


3  II.  xx.  240. 
5  II.  xx.  215-240. 


ON  THE  TITLE  '  AN  AX  ANDRON.' 


165 


against  Ilos.  It  is  true  he  is  named  before  Assaracos  : 
but  in  II.  vi.  76  we  have  JEneas  named  before  Hector 
by  Helenos  ;  and  here  likewise  he  gives  precedence  to 
his  own  birth.  Again,  iEneas  takes  no  part  in  the 
councils  of  Hector ;  and  his  personal  qualities  are  very 
faintly  marked.  Yet,  like  Hector,  he  is  honored  as  a 
god ; 1  and  the  special  protection  given  him  by  Posei- 
don marks  him  as  a  most  important  personage.  His 
name  is  combined  with  that  of  Hector  2  in  a  way  which 
almost  implies  a  parity  of  military  command.  More- 
over, there  is  jealousy  between  him  and  the  house  of 
King  Priam.  He  hangs  on  the  outskirt  of  the  battle,3 
and  cherishes  resentment,  because  he  does  not  receive 
due  honor  from  the  monarch.  Yet  the  character  of 
Priam  was  genial  and  kindly.  Again,  iEneas  is  taunted 
by  Achilles4  with  entertaining  the  hope  of  succeeding  to 
the  throne  of  Troy.  In  answer  to  this  taunt,  he  utters 
no  contradiction  of  it,  but  simply  gives  his  genealogy. 
This  seems  very  like  an  assertion  of  his  title,  which,  if 
it  existed,  could  only  rest  on  seniority. 

iEneas  does  not  thwart  Hector  in  counsel  like  Polu- 
damas :  so  that  there  could  be  no  umbrage  taken  on 
that  ground. 

Zeus  had  presented  Tros  with  certain  horses,  in  com- 
pensation for  the  loss  of  Ganymede.  These  horses  re- 
mained with  Laomedon  in  the  plain.  But  Anchises5 
brought  his  mares  to  them  surreptitiously,  and  got  pos- 
session of  the  breed.  And  it  is  here  that  this  prince  is 
called  anax  andron,  as  though  to  say,  in  virtue  of  his 
being  the  lineal  representative  of  the  elder  branch,  he 


i  II.  xi.  58 ;  cf.  v.  467.  2  n.  vi.  75,  77.  »  II.  xiii.  459. 

4  H.  xx.  179-183.  -5  n.  v.  268. 


166 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


thus  asserted  his  claim  to  the  use  of  a  gift  which  had 
been  presented  to  Tros  the  common  ancestor. 

I  have  said,  that  the  import  of  this  title  seems  to 
carry  it  back  to  a  period  anterior  to  the  political  or- 
ganization of  society  which  we  find  in  Greece.  Are  we 
then  to  suppose,  that  it  also  came  into  the  family  of 
Dardanos  before  his  settlement  on  Mount  Ida  ?  I  reply 
that  first  there  is  not  the  same  cogency  of  reason  for 
supposing  it :  for  the  relation  of  the  Asiatic  king  to  his 
people  was  far  more  accordant  than  that  of  the  Greek 
to  the  idea  implied  in  an  ax  andron.  But  neither 
need  it  be  rejected  on  the  ground  that  Dardanos  is  the 
son  of  Zeus.  For,  in  these  remote  ascriptions  of  Divine 
origin 1  to  royal  houses,  possibly  little  more  in  substance 
is  intended  than  is  less  pointedly  conveyed  in  the  pecu- 
liar and  exclusive  ascription  to  Kings  of  the  epithets 
Diogenes,  Zeus-born,  and  Diotrephes,  Zeus-nurtured. 
Certainly  they  are  to  be  distinguished  from  cases  of 
nearer  mythological  parentage ;  and  they  can  hardly 
mean  more  than  something  of  special  dignity  as  among 
kingly  houses,  or  else  a  simple  attribute  of  the  class. 
But  in  truth  the  case  of  Dardanos  and  his  family  will, 
if  I  mistake  not,  be  found  to  fall  in  with  the  general 
course  of  the  argument. 

The  use  of  this  title  is  a  remarkable  sign  of  affinity 
between  the  Trojans  and  the  Greeks :  but  here  is  not 
the  place  most  convenient  for  examining  into  the 
general  signs  of  that  affinity. 

We  have  seen  that,  in  the  case  of  Anchises,  the  title 
anax  andron  is  employed  as  if  to  justify  him  in  an 
act  of  aggression  in  virtue  of  this  dignity.    Again,  in 


i  II.  xx.  215. 


ON  THE  TITLE  6  AN  AX  ANDR5n.'  167 

the  case  of  iEneas,  we  are  told  at  a  great  crisis, 6  and 
now  would  have  perished  utterly  the  anax  andron 
iEneas,  had  not  Aphrodite  perceived  his  plight.' 1  As  if 
to  say, '  great  though  he  was,  it  would  have  been  all 
over  with  him.'  There  will  be  occasion  to  notice  in 
other  cases,  how  pointedly  this  phrase  is  used  in  con- 
nection with  some  striking  act  or  crisis,  and  by  no 
means  as  an  otiose  or  merely  ornamental  epithet. 

IV.  AUGEIAS. 

The  Elian  contingent  is  sent  to  the  War  under  four 
separate  leaders  ;  of  whom  one  is  Poluxeinos,  son  of 
Agasthenes.  He  is  termed  a  prince  or  lord,  and  (by 
patronymic)  descendant  of  Augeias.2 

In  the  Nestorian  legend  of  the  Eleventh  Iliad,  we 
are  told  that  Neleus 3  sent  to  Elis  a  four-horsed  chariot 
to  contend  in  the  Games  ;  but  Augeias,  who  is  here 
termed  anax  andron,  laid  hands  on  the  horses,  and 
detained  them.  Hence  the  invasion  from  Pulos,  effected 
by  Achaians,  under  the  guidance  of  Athene.  Aga- 
mede,  the  daughter  of  Augeias,  was  profoundly  versed 
in  drugs.4  And  she  was  married  to  MoKos,  a  descend- 
ant of  Poseidon  through  Actor  ;  who  resided  at  court, 
and  was  slain  by  Nestor  in  the  Pulian  raid.5 

We  may  justly  suppose  that  Augeias  ruled  over  Elis, 
because  the  noble  Actorid  family  were  attached  to  his 
court  as  the  court  of  a  superior.  Whereas  at  the  time 
of  the  Troi'ca,  when  the  unity  of  the  Elian  State 
appears  to  have  been  broken  up,  the  Actorids  of  the 


1  II.  v.  311. 
4  II.  xi.  741. 


2  II.  ii.  615-624. 

5  II.  xi.  738,  740,  741. 


3  II.  xi.  670  seqq. 


168 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


time  command  distinct  military  divisions,  upon  a  foot- 
ing of  equality  with  the  descendant  of  Augeias.  It  is 
probable  that  Elis,  like  Boeotia,  had  already  undergone 
revolutions ;  and  for  the  same  cause,  namely,  its  fer- 
tility. 

Other  circumstances  enhance  the  presumption  of  the 
great  position  and  high  descent  of  Augeias  ;  especially, 
his  presiding  over  the  Games.  To  these  Games,  as  we 
see,  the  neighboring  States,  some  half-century  before 
the  war,  already  sent  their  chariots  to  compete.  To 
these  it  seems  probable  that  Thamuris1  was  on  his 
way,  when  he  met  with  the  calamity  which  deprived 
him  of  the  gift  of  song  ;  for  we  find  he  had  reached 
the  Alpheos,  at  a  distance  from  his  own  country,  and 
from  the  court  of  Eurutos,  to  which  he  apparently  be- 
longed. 

With  respect  to  the  descent  of  Augeias,  Homer  is 
silent,  and  we  must  look  for  the  aid  of  general  tradi- 
tion. He  was  reputed  to  be  the  son  of  Salmoneus, 
and  thus  a  descendant  of  Aiolos.  In  this  manner  he 
comes  within  the  circle  of  the  Phoenician  traditions. 
And  though  Aiolos  is  of  divine  descent,  like  Belle- 
rophon,2  the  text  of  the  Odyssey  supports  this  tradi- 
tion3 (1)  by  giving  him  the  epithet  of  amumon, 
which  appears  to  be  used  by  Homer  not  as  an  epithet 
of  character,  but  most  commonly  as  one  indicating  a 
divine  descent,  of  the  same  class  as  that  of  the  Dar- 
danids  ;  (2)  Because  the  name  of  his  daughter  Turo 
points  to  Tyre ;  (3)  Because  she  is  called  zvrtaxtQuaf 
an  epithet  only  used  in  two  other  places,5  and  both 


i  II.  ii.  594-600.  2  n.  vj.  191.  3  Od.  xi.  235  seqq. 

4  '  daughter  of  a  noble  sire.'  5  II.  vi.  292  ;  Od.  xxii.  227. 


ON  THE  TITLE  £  ANAX  ANDRON.' 


169 


times  with  respect  to  Helen,  who  is  treated  as  the 
daughter  of  Zeus,  dibg  knytyoLvia.1 

Tradition  also  places  in  Elis  one  of  the  ancient 
towns  called  Ephure\  The  text  of  Homer,  without 
directly  confirming  the  tradition,  is  more  than  probably 
in  accordance  with  it.  For  Odysseus  visited  Ephure 
to  obtain  poison  for  arrows.2  And  it  was  feared  that 
Telemachos  might  pay  a  like  visit.3  Now  it  is  certain 
(1)  that  this  must  have  been  an  Ephure*  on  the  west 
coast  of  Greece ;  therefore  probably  in  Peloponnesos, 
for  intercourse  does  not  appear  to  pass  northwards  be- 
yond the  Gulf  of  Corinth ;  (2)  that  it  could  not  be 
the  EphurS  of  Sisuphos,  since  this  to  all  appearance 
had  now  become  Corinth,  and  is  so  named  in  the  Cata- 
logue.4 Furthermore,  in  both  cases  Ephur£  was  a 
place  where  the  use  of  drugs  was  studied  ;  and  in  this 
use  the  daughter  of  Augeias,  as  we  have  seen,  was 
skilled.  We  may,  then,  reasonably  assume  that  Au- 
geias dwelt  at  EphurS,  though  at  the  period  of  the 
Tro'ica  the  place  was  not  significant  enough  to  be 
named  in  connection  with  the  force  from  Elis  ;  but  few 
towns  or  settlements  of  which,  however,  are  recited  in 
the  Catalogue. 

In  the  case  of  Augeias,  as  of  Anchises  and  iEneas, 
we  may  observe  the  very  emphatic  use  of  the  phrase. 
The  anax  andr5n  detained  the  mares:  i.e.  he  kept 
the  mares,  as  if  presuming  upon  his  dignity  of  anax 
andron. 


i  H.  iii.  199,  418,  et  alibi.  Cf.  Od.  iv.  569. 
3  Od.  ii.  328. 


2  Od.  i.  259. 
4  II.  ii.  570. 


170 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


V.  EUPHETES. 

Euphetes  is  named  but  once  by  Homer.  Meges,  a 
Greek  chieftain,  is  saved  from  the  spear-stroke  of 
Dolops  by  the  stoutness  of  his  many-layered  breast- 
plate,1 brought  by  his  father  Phuleus  from  Ephure% 
hard  by  the  River  Selleeis,  where  it  was  given  him  by 
his  host  the  anax  and r on  Euphetes. 

Euphetes,  then,  is  manifestly  the  king  of  Ephurd : 
and  is  at  once  brought  within  the  circle  of  those  tradi- 
tions to  which  the  name  belongs. 

The  question,  over  which  Ephure  Euphetes  reigned, 
is  at  first  sight  less  important  than  the  relation  estab- 
lished by  the  name  itself.  Strabo  2  reckons,  besides 
Corinth,  an  Ephur£  in  Elis,  one  in  Thesprotia,  one  in 
Thessaly,  and  five  others,  which  had  fallen  to  the  con- 
dition of  mere  villages.  In  Homer,  we  hear  (1)  of  the 
Ephure  of  Corinth,  (2)  indirectly  of  that  of  Elis,  (8) 
of  the  Ephur£  from  which  Heracles  carried  off  Astuo- 
cheia,  the  mother  of  Tlepolemos,  after  a  destructive 
raid.  This  would  appear  to  have  been  in  Thessaly  ; 
since  Tlepolemos  comes  from  Rhodes,  and  we  have 
other  examples  of  connection  between  Thessaly  and 
the  southern  islands  in  the  persons  of  the  descendants 
of  Heracles  ;  3  but  none  between  those  islands  and  the 
west  of  Peloponnesos. 

According  to  Strabo,4  Euphetes  was  the  son  of 
Augeias.  If  so,  nothing  can  better  accord  with  the 
Homeric  text,  which  makes  Meges  5  the  commander  of 
a  contingent  from  the  coast  over  against  Elis ;  which 


i  II.  xv.  530. 
4  p.  459. 


a  p.  332. 
&  H.  ii.  627. 


3  II.  ii.  676-680. 


ON  THE  TITLE  6  ANAX  ANDRON.'  171 

places  him  in  battle  at  the  head  of  the  Epeian  troops  ; 1 
and  which  states  that  Phuleus,  his  parent,  had  emi- 
grated on  account  of  a  feud  with  his  own  father.2 
Phuleus  is  not  condemned  on  account  of  this  feud,  but 
on  the  contrary  is  commended  as  dear  to  Zeus.  It 
was  in  every  way  fit,  then,  that  he  should  continue  to 
be  united  by  the  ties  of  guestship  with  the  lord  of  Elis. 
And  as  to  the  use  of  the  title  an  ax  andron,  the 
case  of  Euphetes  may  thus  in  all  probability  fall  under 
that  of  Augeias.  It  appears  indeed  possible,  though 
I  will  not  now  venture  to  dwell  upon  it,  that  the 
name  Ephure^  may  of  itself  be  a  sign  of  Phoenician 
relations. 

YI.  EuMelos. 

Eumelos  commands  before  Troy  the  forces  of  his 
father  Admetos.  The  seat  of  his  throne  seems  to  have 
been  at  Pherai,  a  name  not  improbably  akin  to  Ephure.3 
And  here  we  find  it  holding  the  same  relation  to  the 
an  ax  andron  Eumelos,  as  Ephure  holds  to  two  other 
bearers  of  the  same  title,  namely  Augeias  and  Euphetes. 
Further,  we  have  seen  that  the  name  Ephure  is  also 
connected  with  the  Aiolid  line  in  the  person  of  Sisu- 
phos.  Now  we  find  from  Homer  that  Alcestis  the 
mother  of  Eumelos  was  the  daughter  of  Pelias,  and 
that  Pelias  was  the  spurious  child  of  Poseidon,  by 
Turo  afterwards  the  wife  of  Cretheus  the  Aiolid : 
while  in  the  male  line,  which  would  govern  the  de- 
scent, the  family  was  descended  from  Pheres,4  and 
Pheres  was  one  of  the  legitimate  sons  of  Cretheus. 


i  II.  xiii.  692. 

3  II.  ii.  711-715 ;  Od.  iv.  798. 


2  II.  ii.  629. 
4  II.  ii.  763. 


172 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


Eumelos  therefore  is  an  Aiolid,  and  as  such  is  sprung 
from  Zeus. 

He  is  mentioned  six  times  in  oblique  cases,  either  of 
his  own  name  or  of  his  patronymic  Pheretiades,  and 
five  times  in  the  nominative  ;  but  only  once  as  a  n  a  x 
andron.1  This  again  is  on  the  only  occasion  that 
called  for  the  use  of  an  emphatic  phrase,  since  his 
only  conspicuous  action  in  the  Poems  is  that,  being 
possessed  of  the  finest  horses,2  and  excelling  in  their 
management,  he  springs  up  much  more  rapidly  than 
any  other  chieftain,  to  accept  the  challenge  of  the 
chariot-race  in  the  Twenty-third  Iliad.3 

The  Homeric  evidence  then,  gathered  from  various 
parts  of  the  Poems,  and  slightly  aided  by  the  filling 
in  of  blanks  from  tradition,  may  be  summed  up  as 
follows :  — 

1.  The  employment  of  this  phrase  seems  not  to  be 
accidental  or  to  be  meant  for  mere  ornament ;  but  to 
rest  upon  a  common  character  attaching  to  those  who 
bear  it. 

2.  It  is  borne  only  by  ruling  princes,  or  their 
heirs. 

3.  But  though  a  title  of  peculiar  dignity,  it  does  not 
indicate  a  present  superiority  of  power  or  prerogative 
to  other  contemporary  rulers. 

4.  In  the  cases  of  the  Dardan  princes,  and  of  Eu- 
melos, the  text  shows  expressly  that  it  accompanies 
descent  from  Zeus,  at  a  remote  date,  and  without  the 
name  of  a  mother. 

5.  In  the  cases  of  Euphetes  and  Augeias,  tradition 
states,  and  the  text  indirectly  but  strongly  supports,  a 
similar  descent. 

i  II.  xxiii.  288.  2  n.  ii.  763,  »  n  xxm  288. 


ON  THE  TITLE  6  ANAX  ANDRON.' 


173 


6.  In  the  case  of  the  Pelopids,  all  direct  indications 
fail  us ;  but  even  here,  Pelops,  or  his  reputed  father 
Tantalos,  would  appear  to  be  a  personage  standing 
relatively  to  Greek  history  in  much  the  same  position 
as  Aiolos,  that  is,  as  the  foreign  head  and  founder  of 
a  ruling  race ;  a  character,  which  also  apparently  at- 
taches to  Dardanos  in  Troas. 

7.  In  each  and  all  of  these  cases,  the  ancestor  ap- 
pears upon  the  scene  of  Greek  tradition  as  already  a 
prince ;  and  always  at  a  period  antecedent  to  the  for- 
mation of  anything  like  polity  in  Greece. 

8.  It  is  in  this  attitude  that  we  are  justified  in  be- 
lieving Homer  presents  to  us  those  archaic  characters 
in  Greece,  whose  prior  history  and  descent  were  for- 
eign, so  that  if  distinctly  unfolded  they  would  have 
broken  his  uniform  rule  by  representing  leading 
elements  of  Greek  society  and  nationality  as  derived 
from  foreign  sources. 

9.  The  nature  of  the  phrase  anax  andron  mean- 
ing nearly,  as  it  does, c  master  of  men,'  seems  to  bear  a 
foreign  rather  than  a  Hellenic  color,  and  is  probably 
drawn  from  a  state  of  civil  society,  which  may  be  called 
either  more  patriarchal,  or  more  Asiatic,  than  that  of 
the  Hellenes :  a  state  where  power  was  more  absolute, 
and  right  less  distinctly  recognized,  than  they  were 
respectively  in  the  Greece  of  Homer.  It  is  a  title 
which,  whatever  be  its  lingering  glories,  has  not  in  it 
any  savor  of  liberty. 

10.  The  name  is  nowhere  found  in  connection  with 
Pelasgian  associations ;  but  it  attaches  strongly  to 
what  had  been  all  along  the  ruling  element  in  Greek 
society  from  its  first  recorded  formation,  whether  in 
connection  with  the  Achaian  or  with  the  Phoenician 


174 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


name  ;  namely,  a  primitive  chiefship  or  superiority, 
linked  to  something  which,  as  to  time  and  place,  lay 
beyond  the  Greek  horizon  proper. 

11.  Under  these  conditions,  it  is  not  difficult  to  see 
that  the  title  of  anax  andron  could  not  apply  (for 
example)  to  Achilles  or  Odysseus,  whose  families  were 
not  the  representatives  of  these  ancient  sovereignties  : 
or  to  Nestor,  whose  descent  from  Poseidon  was  veiled 
by  spurious  birth,  and  who  was  connected  with  Aiolos 
only  in  the  female  line :  or  to  Sarpedon,  who  is  di- 
rectly affiliated  to  Zeus :  neither  do  any  of  them,  nor 
does  Diomed  or  Ajax,  stand  in  any  relation  to  the 
characteristic  name  of  Ephure,  or  of  the  Selleeis. 

12.  Nor  is  it  difficult  to  understand  why  this  title  of 
sovereignty  and  honor,  alone  among  those  employed  by 
Homer,  passes  away  with  him. 

We  cannot  say  whether  it  was  accompanied  with 
any  prerogatives  of  a  substantive  character,  as  it  evi- 
dently was  with  a  peculiar  form  of  dignity.  Those 
characters  and  families,  who  had  not  risen  by  effort 
and  degree,  of  whom  no  human  memory  bore  record 
that  they  had  at  any  period  been  less  than  the  leaders 
and  the  lords  of  men,  and  whose  names  were  associated 
with  the  earliest  guidance  lent  to  Greece  in  her  first 
struggles  for  civilization,  might  well  remain  as  bright 
luminaries  adorning  the  past  of  the  race,  until  either 
a  great  lapse  of  time,  or,  more  probably,  a  breaking  up 
of  the  social  and  political  system  they  had  taken  a  lead 
in  creating,  should  bring  about  their  extinction.  And 
it  is  change  of  this  kind,  on  the  brink  of  which  Homer 
leaves  us,  as  he  disappears  from  us  in  the  distance. 
In.  soft  music,  he  sings  out  the  heroic  age  of  heroes  : 
and  after  him,  as  Hesiod  tells  us,  a  ruder  and  a  darker 


ON  THE  TITLE  '  ANAX  ANDRON.' 


175 


age  is  sung  in  with  a  wilder  music.  The  traditions,  and 
the  families,  of  the  older  time  are  submerged  by  the 
flood  of  Dorian  conquest.  The  noble  and  refined 
Achaian  succumbs  to  the  halfjsavage  Heraclid.  The 
Hellenic  world  is  resolved  into  a  chaos,  which  devours 
its  ancient  ideas  and  institutions :  though  the  spirit  of 
life  still  breathes  over  the  formless  mass,  and  gradually 
moulds  it  into  a  new  and  more  organized  and  splendid, 
if  not  a  more  pure  and  healthful  civilization. 


CHAPTER  VII. 


The  Olympian  System. 

Homer  was  the  maker  not  only  of  Poems  ;  but  also, 
in  a  degree  never  equalled  by  any  other  poet, 

1.  Of  a  language ; 

2.  Of  a  nation  ; 

3.  Of  a  religion. 

The  common  tradition  of  Greece  recognized  the  poets, 
as  having  had  a  large  share  in  the  formation  of  the 
religion  of  the  country.  These  poets  were  in  particular 
Homer  and  Hesiod,  as  represented  by  the  works  as- 
cribed to  them.  But  the  difference  is  immense  between 
the  work  performed  by  the  author  of  the  Iliad  and 
Odyssey,  and  the  author  of  the  Theogony  respectively. 
The  latter,  at  a  date  very  early  without  doubt,  though 
sensibly  later  than  that  of  Homer,  placed  upon  record, 
and  arranged,  the  mythological  legends  of  the  portion 
of  country,  supposed  to  have  been  Bceotia,  within 
which  he  lived ;  and  the  late  position,  given  in  the 
poem  to  the  gods  of  the  Olympian  dynasty,  is  in  ac- 


THE  OLYMPIAN  SYSTEM. 


177 


cordance  with  all  the  indications  of  the  Homeric  pro- 
ductions. But  the  mythology  of  Homer,  instead  of 
being  a  chronicle  or  a  catalogue,  is  a  supreme  work  of 
art,  that  lives,  breathes,  and  moves,  like  the  metallic 
statues  of  his  own  Hephaistos.  And  it  is  precisely 
the  contrast  between  this  wonderful  performance  and 
the  Theogony  of  Hesiod,  which  enables  us  to  conceive 
in  some  degree  the  immense  power  with  which  the  ima- 
gination of  Homer  operated  in  shaping  the  characters 
of  the  Olympian  gods,  in  adjusting  their  relations  to 
one  another,  and  in  fixing  the  conditions  of  their 
government  of  the  world,  and  of  their  intercourse  with 
the  children  of  men.  On  these  great  matters,  a  poem 
like  that  of  Hesiod  could  have  no  other  influence,  than 
a  register  of  births  and  deaths  could  have  upon  the 
social  and  political  fortunes  of  a  community. 

In  the  supernatural  world  of  Homer,  we  find  deities 
not  only  of  different  ranks  and  attributes,  but  marked 
with  very  great  varieties  of  moral  character  and  tone ; 
bearing  marks  of  connection  with  different  places, 
countries,  races  of  men,  and  celestial  dynasties,  or 
theogonies,  with  very  different  degrees  of  respect  paid 
to  them ;  and  these  again  varying  with  races  of  men 
and  local  situations. 

At  the  same  time,  these  beings  have  a  head,  a  central 
place  of  habitation,  a  system  and  polity  among  them- 
selves ;  to  which,  however,  the  various  members  of  the 
supernatural  order  are  very  variously  related. 

In  a  word,  we  appear  to  see  a  great  mass  of  hete- 
rogeneous materials  having  reference  to  the  unseen 
world,  which,  as  they  were  probably  settling  down  in 
the  world  of  fact,  from  their  recent  contact,  into  more 
stable  and  normal  relations,  so,  in  the  world  of  poetry, 

12 


178 


JUVENTUS  MUNDT. 


they  receive  from  the  hand  of  the  master  an  unity 
fitting  them  to  constitute  that  intellectual  and  ideal 
whole,  which  we  know  as  the  Hellenic  religion.  In 
this  process  of  constr notion,  the  actual  belief,  tradi- 
tions, and  tendencies  of  the  people  could  not  but  be 
the  chief  determining  force.  But  the  potent  mind  and 
imagination  of  the  Poet,  in  all  likelihood,  exercised  an 
influence  in  modifying  the  stages  and  fixing  the  con- 
summation of  the  process,  which,  if  secondary  and 
subsidiary  only  with  reference  to  the  powers  before 
mentioned,  may  still  be  justly  supposed  to  have  been 
far  greater  than  any  ever  wielded  by  any  other  Greek, 
whether  legislator,  poet,  or  philosopher. 

There  is  nothing  contrary  to  reason  in  the  suppo- 
sition that  the  condition  of  religion  in  Greece,  at  the 
epoch  of  Homer's  existence,  may  have  offered  remark- 
able opportunities  for  the  formative  influence  even  of 
an  individual  mind. 

In  a  nation  of  one  blood,  which  claims  to  be  au- 
tochthonous or  indigenous,  because,  since  first  the  mi- 
gration of  the  primitive  tribe  was  arrested,  it  has  never 
changed  its  seat,  we  may  look  for  a  religion  based  upon 
the  predominance  of  some  single  idea,  and  invested 
with  great  uniformity  of  color. 

But  where,  as  in  Greece,  the  nation  itself  is  com- 
pounded out  of  a  variety  of  factors,  the  religion  will 
naturally  assume  a  variegated  aspect. 

Each  race  or  family  of  immigrants  arrives  cum  Pe- 
natibus  et  magnis  Bis;  brings  with  it  its  own  con- 
ceptions and  names  of  deity.  These  they  set  down 
for  themselves  upon  ground  already  occupied  by  the 
religion  of  the  former  inhabitants,  and  by  their  tra- 
ditional conceptions.     These  conceptions  will  be  in 


THE  OLYMPIAN  SYSTEM. 


179 


many  cases  representatives  of  the  same  original  ideas ; 
and  though  diversely  modified,  after  the  separation  of 
the  races,  according  to  the  genius  and  associations  of 
each  branch,  they  will  often  claim  the  same  attributes, 
and  the  respective  worships  will  tend  to  compete  and 
even  clash  together. 

Qf  this  clashing  we  find  the  mark  in  Homer,  when 
two  deities  have  the  same  function.  Thus  Athene*  is 
even  more  supreme  over  war  than  Ares.  A  Paieon  has 
to  do  with  healing  as  well  as  Apollo.  Poseidon  is  god 
of  the  sea  ;  but  beneath  him,  yet  in  independence  of 
him,  is  Nereus,  inhabiting  the  depths  ;  and  the  sea  is 
affected  by  the  agency  of  Zeus,  or  Here,  or  Athene;,1  or 
Apollo,  with  respect  to  breeze,  and  storm,  and  ship- 
wreck, as  well  as  by  his  own  agency. 

The  same  kind  of  competition  is  represented  in 
Homer  by  the  deposition,  and  relegation  to  a  distance, 
of  the  older  gods  of  the  Nature-system,  and  by  the 
legends  of  the  youth,  or  infancy,  of  Hephaistos  and 
Dionusos. 

Also  this  conflict  of  religions,  growing  out  of  the 
relations  and  conflicts  of  races,  is  powerfully  exhibited 
in  Homer  by  the  division  of  Olympos  into  two  factions 
during  the  Trojan  War,  and  by  the  bold  and  effective, 
if  to  us  incongruous,  conception  of  the  Theomachy,  or 
Battle  of  the  gods. 

In  the  later  tradition,  this  clashing  comes  to  be 
represented  by  the  legends  of  contests  between  two 
deities  for  a  given  territory.  Poseidon  contends  with 
Helios  (the  Sun)  for  Corinth ;  and  with  Athene  for 
Athens.    A  variety  of  other  cases  may  be  cited. 


i  Od  v.  108,  109. 


180 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


Had  the  Poet  worked  up  his  mythological  scheme 
out  of  Greek  materials  alone,  we  may  be  sure  that  the 
relations  of  subordination  among  the  gods  would  have 
been  at  least  as  well  defined,  as  those  subsisting  among 
the  leaders  of  the  army,  or  perhaps  even  the  members 
of  a  well-ordered  family.  Whereas  now  we  find  first 
that  Okeanos,  as  the  head  of  an  older  though  superseded 
dynasty,  stands  aloof,  and  is  exempt  from  attendance 
at  the  Olympian  court ; 1  and  that  the  position  of  Zeus 
among  its  members  reminds  us  of  the  position  of  the 
kings  of  France  before  Louis  XI  among  their  great 
feudatories.  Poseidon,  even  singly,  is  not  without  pre- 
tensions to  an  equality  of  force :  Athene,  without  pro- 
ceeding to  physical  resistance,  does  not  hesitate  to 
oppose  in  debate,  as  well  as  in  veiled  action,  the 
councils  of  her  father :  and  a  combination  of  these  two 
with  Herd  had  once  proved  too  much  for  his  solitary 
strength. 

When  the  various  worships  thus  met  in  competition 
on  the  same  soil,  the  result  could  not  but  be,  either 
that  the  objects  of  them  were  amalgamated  ;  or  that 
some  of  them  were  expelled ;  or  that  by  division  of 
functions,  that  is  a  compromise,  their  differences  were 
adjusted. 

Of  amalgamation  we  observe  an  example  in  the  first 
deity  of  the  Homeric  poems.  The  Zeus  of  Dodona, 
and  of  the  Pelasgians,  becomes  also  the  Zeus  of  the 
Hellic  tribes. 

Of  permanent  expulsion  we  have  examples  in  the 
Okeanos,  and  also  in  the  Kronos,  of  Homer,  with  their 
followings  respectively. 

Of  the  resistance  to  a  new  worship,  and  of  its  tem- 

i  II.  xx.  7. 


THE  OLYMPIAN  SYSTEM. 


181 


porary  exile,  we  have  an  instance  in  the  driving  of 
Dionusos  into  the  sea  by  Lukourgos. 

But  the  great  principle  of  the  Homeric  mythology 
is,  adjustment  by  distribution  of  offices.  And  the  an- 
thropomorphic idea  greatly  favored  the  application  of 
this  principle  ;  since  it  gave  to  the  Poet  all  the  varied 
functions  and  orders  of  humane  society,  both  domestic 
and  political,  as  a  framework  after  which  to  arrange 
his  Olympian  personages. 

And  thus  it  is  that  Homer,  from  living  in  the  midst 
of  an  intermixture  and  fusion  of  bloods  continually 
proceeding  in  Greece,  acquired  a  vast  command  of 
materials,  and  by  his  skilful  use  of  them  exercised  an 
immense  influence  in  the  construction  of  the  Greek 
religion. 

It  became  with  him,  what  it  probably  had  never  been 
before,  and  what  it  was  not  in  the  works  of  any  later 
writer,  a  most  gorgeous  and  imposing,  and  even  in  a 
certain  sense  a  highly  self-consistent,  whole :  contain- 
ing in  itself,  without  doubt,  many  weak  and  many  tar- 
nished elements,  but  yet  serving  in  an  important  de- 
gree the  purpose  of  a  religion  to  control  the  passions 
and  acts  of  men. 

The  Olympian  system  of  Homer  is  eminently  what 
Horace  describes  as 

'  Speciosa  locis,  morataque  recte 
Tabula.' 

It  is  wrought  out  with  pains  and  care,  full  of  character 
and  individuality,  marvellous  alike  in  the  grandeur 
and  the  weaknesses  of  its  personages  —  a  work,  in  the 
very  highest  sense  that  is  applicable  to  any  human 
production,  of  true  and  vast  creative  power. 


182 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


Even  without  the  attestation  of  Plato,  we  might 
have  been  able  to  judge  that  it  was  in  all  likelihood  a 
main  instrument  in  establishing  the  dominant  features 
of  the  Hellenic  religion,  such  as  we  know  them  from 
the  historic  ages.  Partly  it  reduced  to  unity  the  com- 
peting elements  of  the  true  Hellenic  tradition,  of  the 
old  Pelasgian  Nature-worship,  and  of  the  Phoenician, 
Syrian,  and  Egyptian  mythologies  :  partly  it  cast  them 
into  the  shade  of  local,  as  opposed  to  national,  devotion. 
In  the  poems  of  Hesiod,  it  appears  to  us  as  the  latest 
form  of  Greek  religion  ;  but,  more  artfully  compacted 
than  the  rest,  it  acquired  and  retained  a  real  suprem- 
acy among  them,  although  the  diversity  of  aspect  never 
was  effaced. 

Yet  its  character  continually  altered ;  and  altered 
for  the  worse.  It  has  features  which  are  sublime,  and 
features  which  are  debased.  But  the  sublime  features 
of  the  Olympian  characters  became,  with  the  lapse  of 
generations,  less  and  less  observable.  The  debased  ones 
grew  more  and  more  prominent.  And  the  profoundly 
interesting  specialties  of  the  several  deities,  indicating 
their  respective  origins,  at  length  became  apparently 
imperceptible  even  to  the  Greeks  themselves.  No  one 
can  closely  and  carefully  examine  the  system  of  Homer 
without  a  deep  interest :  no  one  can  find  much  ground 
for  such  an  interest  in  the  theological  part  of  the  re- 
ligion of  the  historic  period.  Only  its  ethical  ideas, 
and  the  highly  poetic  ideas  connected  with  destiny, 
retain  any  attractive  power  ;  and  from  the  mythology 
these  ideas  are,  in  the  later  stages  of  the  Olympian 
system,  almost  wholly  dissociated. 

The  wonder  indeed  is,  not  that  the  Olympian 
religion  should  have  failed  to  resist  the  corrosion  of 


THE  OLYMPIAN  SYSTEM. 


183 


change,  but  that  it  should  have  been  able  in  any  man- 
ner to  retain  its  identity.  Devoid  as  it  was  of  all 
authority,  and  even  of  the  allegation  of  authority,  for 
its  origin,  and  not  only  unsustained,  but  belied,  by  the 
witness  of  surrounding  nations,  it  probably  had  little 
else  of  unity  than  such  as  it  derived  from  the  great 
Bard  of  the  nation,  and  from  its  imaginative  splendor ; 
while  it  had  none  of  the  guarantees,  real  even  if  par- 
tial, which  are  afforded  either  by  Books  known  and 
recognized  as  sacred,  or  by  a  compact  and  permanent 
hierarchy,  dating,  or  professing  to  date,  from  the  be- 
ginning of  the  system.  If  the  Homeric  poems  stood 
in  the  place  of  the  former,  yet  we  can  perceive  for 
them  no  avenue  to  the  mind  and  heart  of  man,  except 
that  of  the  poet,  and  the  delight  he  gives ; 

%  koX  dEonuv  aotddv  6  ksv  Tepirrjoiv  aetdtov.1 

And  as  respects  the  latter,  neither  was  the  priest,  as 
such,  a  significant  personage  in  Greece  at  any  period, 
nor  had  the  priest  of  any  one  place  or  deity,  so  far  as 
we  know,  any  organic  connection  with  the  priest  of 
any  other  ;  so  that  if  there  were  priests,  yet  there  was 
not  a  priesthood.  Its  strength  lay,  then,  in  its  beauty  ; 
a  beauty  which,  surviving  the  death  of  the  subject  in 
which  it  resided,  had  power  to  ravish  the  mind  of 
Goethe,  one  among  the  greatest  of  modern  poets ;  and 
probably  we  could  not  name  in  all  human  experience 
a  more  signal  instance  of  the  vast  power  of  the  imagi- 
nation, than  is  to  be  found  in  the  long  life,  and  the 
extended  influences,  of  the  Greek  religion. 

It  found  a  way  to  the  mind  of  man  through  his 
sympathies  and  propensities.    Homer  reflected  upon 

1  Od.  xvii.  385. 


184 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


his  Olympos  the  ideas,  passions,  and  appetites  known 
to  us  all,  with  such  a  force,  that  they  became  with  him 
the  paramount  power  in  the  construction  of  the  Greek 
religion.  This  humanitarian  element  gradually  sub- 
dued to  itself  all  that  it  found  in  Greece  of  traditions 
already  recognized,  whether  primitive  or  modern, 
whether  Hellenic,  Pelasgian,  or  foreign.  The  govern- 
ing idea  of  the  character  of  deity  in  Homer  is  a  nature 
essentially  human,  with  the  addition  of  unmeasured 
power.  It  is  at  once  obvious,  then,  that  the  elements 
of  a  profound  corruption  abound  in  his  Olympian 
Court,  although  they  affect  very  variously  the  person- 
ages who  fill  it.  And  the  principle  upon  which  it  is 
constructed  makes  but  too  copious  a  provision  for  fur- 
ther deterioration. 

Such  accordingly  was  the  actual  working  of  that 
Hellenic  Theo-mythology,  of  which  we  must  regard 
Homer  as  the  great  founder.  With  the  progress  of 
time  it  became  more  and  more  debased,  and  the  dis- 
tinctions originally  perceptible  among  its  elements 
being  worn  away,  it  likewise  fell  into  such  a  state  of 
complexity  as  approached  to  chaos. 

But,  while  the  popular  creed  thus  degenerated,  the 
intelligence  and  the  speculative  mind  of  the  Greeks 
became  more  and  more  estranged  from  it.  With  the 
lapse  of  time  we  must  learn  to  regard  it,  not  as  in 
Homer,  under  a  single  aspect,  but  under  .three :  as  a 
religion  of  philosophers,  a  religion  of  legislators,  and 
a  religion  of  the  people.  By  the  philosophers,  the  ab- 
stract idea  of  deity  was  greatly  purified  and  reformed  ; 
but  the  sense  of  personality  connected  with  it  became 
feebler  and  more  remote.  In  Aristotle,  the  most  pro- 
found and  powerful  mind  of  Greece  in  the  classical 


THE  OLYMPIAN  SYSTEM. 


185 


ages,  as  well  as  perhaps  among  the  purest  which  the 
country  produced,  it  is  reduced,  as  a  practical  principle, 
to  zero.  Still,  the  lofty  sentiments,  thus  elaborated 
in  the  abstract,  again  acquired  much  of  the  warmth  of 
life  in  the  writings  of  some  at  least  of  the  dramatic 
poets  ;  and  may  thus  have  exercised  influence  in  a 
wider  sphere  than  that  supplied  to  the  few  by  the 
thoughtful  studies  of  the  Schools. 

Meantime  the  mythology,  with  its  constant  develop- 
ment and  deterioration,  continued  to  be  accepted  by 
the  people  ;  while  with  a  view,  as  must  be  supposed, 
to  public  order,  all  its  institutions  had  the  steady  coun- 
tenance of  the  ruling  authorities. 

It  may  then  be  believed  that  there  resided  among 
men,  six,  eight,  or  ten  centuries  after  Homer,  a  much 
purer  intellectual  conception  of  deity  than  can  be  col- 
lected from  his  poems  ;  while,  as  a  first  necessity  of 
wealth  and  civilization,  a  defined  but  narrow  morality 
of  property,  so  to  call  it,  arose  ;  both  in  a  form  more 
determinate  than  any  known  to  the  Poet,  and  also  sus- 
tained by  the  machinery  of  law  and  public  policy. 

But,  notwithstanding  all  this,  a  great  real  declension 
in  other,  and  perhaps  yet  graver,  respects  had  taken 
place.  For  the  mass  of  the  population,  the  abuses  and 
corruptions  of  the  older  creed  £  did  not  pass,  but  grew.' 
Not  perhaps  against  society,  which  had  learned  to  take 
care  of  itself,  but  against  the  unseen  Ruler  of  the 
world,  and  against  the  sanctity  of  human  nature,  sins 
and  loathsome  abominations  had  come  in,  and  were 
flourishing  in  a  rank  and  foul  luxuriance,  which  seem  to 
have  been  unknown  to  the  Greece  of  Homer.  For  the 
religion  of  his  day  had  not  ceased  to  be  a  power. 
Variously  and  imperfectly,  but  truly,  men  were  com- 


186 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


manded  and  restrained  by  it.  It  presented  a  system 
of  rewards  and  punishments,  intelligible  to  its  votaries, 
and  operative,  as  it  appears,  to  no  small  extent  upon 
human  conduct.  And  whatever  may  have  been,  as  it  is 
represented,  the  personal  practice  of  the  Homeric 
deities,  their  system  of  government  was  addressed  in 
the  main  to  good  ends.  It  exhibited,  generally  speak- 
ing, though  in  an  imperfect,  yet  in  a  real  manner, 
superior  power,  armed  and  active  on  behalf  of  truth, 
justice,  and  humanity.  This  could  not  but  be  an 
engine  of  great  good.  That  it  was  so,  we  may  learn 
from  a  tone  of  general  character,  which  certainly  did 
not  afterwards  improve,  and  from  the  absence  of  the 
horrors  already  named,  which  afterwards  abounded 
even  in  the  more  refined  regions  and  in  the  educated 
classes  of  society. 

It  may  seem  strange  that  the  two  processes  of  a 
speculative  ascent  and  a  practical  decline,  a  mental 
discipline  of  the  few  and  a  general  dissoluteness  of 
life,  should  be  simultaneous.  But  so  it  was,  even  to 
the  day  of  the  last  dying  throes  of  paganism.  Never 
was  the  heathen  creed,  on  its  intellectual  side,  in  a 
condition  so  sublimated,  as  when  it  perished  under  the 
blows  of  the  Christian  apologists  and  the  influence  of 
the  Church.  But  also,  never  had  its  practical  power, 
as  a  religious  system  elevating  or  constraining  action, 
fallen  so  low,  as  in  the  days  when  its  votaries  were 
habitually  content  to  deify  even  monsters  in  human 
shape,  if  they  wore  the  imperial  purple. 

To  say,  then,  simpliciter,  either  that  the  Greek  re- 
ligion as  it  grew  old  improved,  or  that  it  degenerated, 
would  be  to  use  equivocal  and  misleading  language. 
By  its  side,  and  never  in  any  degree  taking  its  place  in 


THE  OLYMPIAN  SYSTEM. 


187 


the  minds  of  the  many,  there  grew  up  a  speculation, 
which  was  hardly  a  belief,  but  which  put  aside  a  mass 
of  fables,  and  in  many  points  approximated  to  the 
truth,  concerning  the  nature  of  God.  But  as  a  living 
creed  it  worsened  ;  and  as  an  instrument  for  the  gov- 
ernment of  conduct,  it  more  and  more  lost  its  power. 

The  reproaches  of  Plato  against  Homer,  for  the  un- 
worthy treatment  of  the  gods,  can  have  little  influence 
on  our  minds  in  the  light  of  such  knowledge  as  we  now 
possess.  It  would  appear,  from  the  Cratylus  for  exam- 
ple, that  Plato  had  little  knowledge  of  the  origin  of  the 
Hellenic  mythology  ;  and  the  personages,  who  filled  the 
chief  places  in  it,  had  in  his  day  assumed  a  sameness  of 
color  and  position,  which  they  had  not  in  the  time  of 
Homer.  In  order  to  comprehend  the  method  of  the 
Poet,  we  must  bear  in  mind  (1)  that  many  deities, 
afterwards  completely  naturalized,  were  in  his  day  only 
making  the  first  steps  of  their  way  into  Greece ; 
(2)  that  deity  is  with  him  a  most  elastic  idea,  suscepti- 
ble of  infinite  diversities,  in  point  of  both  virtue  and  of 
power ;  (  3)  that  he  has  a  vivid  conception  of  intercom- 
munion between  the  two  natures,  divine  and  human, 
which  was  probably  lost  in  the  time  of  Plato. 

If  Ares  and  Aphrodite  are  exhibited  by  Homer  in 
lights  which  are  even  ridiculous,  we  have  to  observe 
that  nothing  can  be  more  profound,  more  entire,  than 
the  reverence  of  his  mortals  for  Apollo  and  Athene,  nay 
often  for  Poseidon  and  Here.  This  difference  is  not  cas- 
ual ;  it  is  in  the  whole  manner  of  treatment :  and  what 
we  seem  to  learn  from  it  is,  that  among  the  Hellenes 
of  his  time,  Ar£s  and  Aphrodite  had  as  yet  no  regular 
recognition,  no  established  worship.  There  is  not  a 
single  indication  of  either  in  the  Poems  ;  though  it  ap- 


188 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


pears  from  them  that  these  deities  were  worshipped  in 
Thrace  and  in  Cyprus  respectively. 

Apart  from  this,  Homer's  system  of  thought  included 
a  number  of  beings,  whom  he  calls  divine,  but  in  whom 
the  divine  attributes  are  minimized.  The  Gigantes, 
who  rushed  to  their  own  ruin ;  the  Kuklopes,  who  ex- 
hibit a  perfectly  brutalized  humanity ;  the  Phaiakes, 
who  in  all  manly  qualities  are  represented  as  much 
below  the  Greek  level ;  all  these  were  kinsfolk  of  the 
gods. 

A  slight  circumstance  shows  us  how,  in  Homer,  the 
divine  idea  could  be  reduced  to  the  smallest  dimensions 
of  power.  When  the  comrades  of  Odysseus  ate  the 
oxen  of  the  sun,  Lampetie,  his  daughter  by  Neaira, 
expressly  called  a  goddess,1  carried  the  news  of  the 
deed  to  her  father.  Obviously,  then,  she  had  not  her- 
self sufficient  power  to  prevent  or  punish  this  offence, 
committed  by  a  mere  handful  of  exhausted  mariners. 
Neither  could  the  Sun,  who  is  called  all-beholding,  see 
the  act  from  his  pathway  in  the  heavens,  without  her 
intervention  as  a  messenger. 

The  principal  materials  of  religion  which  Homer 
found  ready  to  his  hand  were,  so  far  as  appears,  sup- 
plied by 

1.  The  Pelasgian  or  other  archaic  races,  which  had 
had  possession  of  the  peninsula  prior  to  the  Hellenes. 

2.  The  Hellic  families  and  tribes. 

3.  The  Phoenician  immigration. 

4.  An  Egyptian  and  oriental  influence  which  we  trace 
(a)  in  obscure  traditions,  and  (6)  in  the  actual  remains 
of  a  worship  clearly  proceeding  from  this  origin,  which 


i  Od.  xii.  131-133. 


THE  OLYMPIAN  SYSTEM. 


189 


endured  down  to  the  time  of  Pausanias.  This  was  prob- 
ably brought  to  Greece  through  the  Phoenician  vehicle. 

The  Zeus  of  Homer  is  equally  Pelasgian  and  Hel- 
lenic. 

The  Apollo,  the  Athene",  and  the  Her£  appear  to  be- 
long especially  to  Hellenic  traditions.  But  the  two 
first  carry  marks,  which  can  hardly  be  mistaken,  of  an 
affinity,  probably  dating  from  a  very  early  period,  to  the 
Hebrew  traditions,  recorded  in  the  sacred  Scriptures. 

The  Poseidon  of  Homer  is  manifestly  Phoenician. 
This  deity  waives  as  it  were  his  supremacy  on  coming 
into  Greece,  in  deference  to  the  paramount  force  of  the 
religion  of  the  major  number,  and  to  the  ruling  in- 
fluences. Yet  the  character  and  worship  of  Poseidon 
may  occasionally  in  Greece,  as  well  as  elsewhere,  have 
been  preserved  under  the  name  of  Zeus. 

These  five  are  the  five  great  deities  of  the  Poems. 
But  it  may  be  convenient  to  consider  first  the  mode 
which  Homer  has  devised  for  dealing  with  the  elder 
gods. 

It  is  in  a  far-distant  perspective  that  he  places  the 
Elemental  or  Nature  powers ;  which  are  thus  removed 
from  inconvenient  contact  with  the  actual  governors  of 
the  world,  and  yet  are  subjected  to  no  indignity. 

At  the  head  of  these  is  Okeanos  ;  whom  Homer  re- 
gards as  the  source  (not  the  father,  that  title  being  re- 
served for  Zeus)  of  all  the  gods.  He  is  not  invested 
with  anthropomorphic  attributes,  a  circumstance  which 
indicates  the  distinctness  of  the  race  which  had  wor- 
shipped him.  But  Homer,  paying  a  marked  respect  to 
his  dignity,  does  not'  summon  him  to  the  great  Olym- 
pian Assembly  of  the  Twentieth  Book,1  where,  if  he 


i  II.  xx.  7. 


190 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


had  appeared,  he  must  have  been  second  to  Zeus.  It 
is  possible  even  that  the  relations  of  this  deity  to  man- 
kind were  pre-Pelasgic ;  as  Zeus  appears  to  have  been  in 
the  Pelasgian  system,  and  Okeanos  could  hardly  have 
been  there  except  as  its  head. 

In  no  case  is  the  Homeric  treatment  more  artful, 
than  in  that  of  the  sea  or  water  god  Nereus.  He  is 
completely  invested  with  the  anthropomorphic  char- 
acter ;  for  he  is  blessed  with  an  abundant  progeny  of 
daughters.  But  his  place  was  wanted  for  Poseidon : 
he  is  therefore  confined  to  the  sea-deep  ;  and  he  is 
in  no  manner  or  degree  an  object  of  worship  in  the 
Poems. 

While  the  Olympian  system  generally  is  to  be  re- 
garded as  alien  to  elemental  worship,  and  as  founded 
on  a  different  basis,  it  is  important  to  trace  nevertheless 
such  vestiges  of  the  elder  religion  as  are  to  be  found 
among  the  Greeks  of  Homer. 

1.  In  the  Pact  of  the  Third  Iliad,  the  original  terms 
were 1  that  the  Greeks  should  offer  a  lamb  to  Zeus  ;  the 
Trojans  two,  the  one  black,  the  other  white,  to  Gaia  and 
Helios,  the  Earth  and  the  Sun.  This  appears  to  draw 
the  line  pretty  clearly  between  some  leading  ideas  of 
the  worship  of  the  two  countries  ;  which  nevertheless 
had,  as  is  plain,  many  points  of  contact. 

When  we  come  to  the  actual  Invocation,  Agamemnon 
officiates  on  behalf  of  both  parties.2  Accordingly  he 
first  invokes  Zeus  (but  as  ruling  from  Ida)  ;  then  the 
all-seeing,  all-hearing  Helios ;  and  then  he  inserts,  be- 
fore Gaia,  the  Rivers  ;  and  he  adds  the  deities  (without 
naming  them)  who  dwell  beneath,  and  who  punish 
perjurers  in  the  Future  State,  or  Underworld. 


i  II.  iii.  103. 


2  II.  iii.  276-280. 


THE  OLYMPIAN  SYSTEM. 


191 


2.  In  the  Nineteenth  Iliad  we  have  an  oath  and 
Invocation  purely  Greek ; 1  and  on  comparing  it  with 
the  former  we  find 

a.  That  Zeus  is  invoked  without  any  mention  of  Ida. 

b.  The  Earth  is  next  named. 

c.  The  Sun  is  invoked  without  any  special  words  of 
personification. 

d.  The  Erinues,  strictly  ethical  personages,  are 
named  as  the  deities  below,  unnamed  in  the  previous 
Invocation. 

e.  The  Rivers  do  not  appear. 

3.  We  also  have,  in  the  Ninth  Iliad,  another  impre- 
catory Invocation ;  that  of  Althaia,  mother  of  Mele- 
agros.  She  addresses  herself  to  (a)  the  Earth,  (6) 
A'idoneus,  and  (c)  Persephone :  and  her  prayer  is 
heard,  and  evidently  granted  as  well  as  heard,  by  the 
air-stalking  Erinus.  The  offence  here  was  not  perjury, 
but  the  slaying  of  her  brother  by  her  son. 

We  thus  perceive,  from  the  first  Invocation,  either 
that  the  Earth  and  Sun  stood  to  the  Trojans  as  Zeus 
did  to  the  Greeks,  or  that,  when  all  were  to  be  ad- 
dressed, the  Earth  and  Sun  fell  to  the  Trojans  from 
some  greater  affinity  to  their  creed.  But  when  we 
come  to  an  Invocation  affecting  the  Greeks  alone,  in 
the  Nineteenth  Book,  the  Sun  is  less  prominently 
named,  and  the  purely  ethical  element  is  introduced 
in  the  Erinues,  avengers  of  perjury  in  the  nether 
world. 

In  the  mixed  Invocation  the  Erinues  are  not  named, 
but  are  evidently  the  personages  glanced  at  as  avengers 
beneath  the  earth  and  after  death. 


i  II.  xix.  258-260. 


192 


JUVENTUS  MUNPI. 


We  also  find  it  clearly  established  by  these  passages, 
that  the  Nature-gods  in  general  were  treated  by  Homer 
as  subterranean:  though  this  did  not  absolutely  and 
invariably  exclude  them  from  the  Olympian  family. 
And  the  office  generally  assigned  to  them  is  not  a 
share  in  the  ordinary  government  of  the  world,  but  is 
the  infliction  of  punishment,  both  for  perjury  and  also 
for  other  offences,  in  a  future  state. 

Hence  it  is  that  Achilles,  a  lock  of  whose  hair  had 
been  promised  by  his  father  Peleus  to  be  dedicated  to 
the  River  Spercheios  on  his  return  home,  deposits  such 
a  lock,  at  the  time  when  he  knows  he  shall  not  return 
home  at  all,  in  the.  hands  of  the  dead  Patroclos ;  that 
his  spirit  may  carry  it  to  the  River-god,  in  the  Under- 
world.1 Here  we  have  the  clearest  evidence  that  the 
Underworld,  into  which  Patroclos  was  about  to  find 
entrance,  was  the  ordinary  residence  of  the  River- 
gods. 

Nor  is  this  the  only  case  of  River-worship  in  the 
Poems.  The  Pulians  in  the  Bpeian  even  sacrificed  a 
bull  to  Alpheios,2  when  they  reached  his  banks ;  and 
Odysseus  likewise  invokes  the  unnamed  River  of 
Scherie,  at  whose  mouth  he  touches  the  shore.3  These 
two,  it  will  be  observed,  were  plainly  acts  of  worship 
with  reference  to  some  immediate  result,  and  implied 
the  exercise  by  the  Rivers  respectively  of  some  present 
prerogatives.  On  the  other  hand  we  may  notice  their 
strictly  local  character,  as  well  as  that  of  the  act  done 
by  Achilles. 

To  the  great  Olympian  Assembly  of  the  Twentieth 
Book,  which  is  to  prepare  the  way  for  a  decisive  issue 


i  II.  xxiii.  144-151. 


2  II.  xi.  728. 


3  Od.  v.  445. 


THE  OLYMPIAN  SYSTEM. 


193 


to  the  war,  Themis  summons  the  Rivers  (except  old 
Okeanos)  and  the  Nymphs  who  frequent  or  inhabit  the 
groves  and  fountains.  These  latter,  both  here  and 
elsewhere,  are  evidently  conceived  under  the  condi- 
tions of  the  human  form.  A  like  process  had  been 
begun  with  the  Rivers ;  because  Poseidon 1  accom- 
plishes his  purpose  with  Turo  in  the  form  of  the  River 
Enipeus.  Others,  too,  of  the  Rivers  have  human  sons. 
Nay,  they  even  sate  on  the  burnished  chairs  of  the 
Olympian  Hall.2 

Nor  let  it  be  thought  strange,  that  while  the  worship 
(except  for  imprecation)  of  the  greater  deities  of  the 
old  Pelasgian  system  had  been  superseded,  that  of 
smaller  ones  had  thus  survived.  For  the  Dii  majores 
of  that  system,  by  reason  of  their  very  greatness,  had 
no  one  exclusive  residence.  But  the  River-worship 
was  strictly  local ;  and  it  is  the  nature  of  this  local 
worship,  in  whatever  age,  and  in  connection  with 
whatever  creed,  to  take  a  deep  hold,  and  live  a  tena- 
cious life.  Of  this  there  can  be  no  stronger  proof  than 
the  great  number  of  temples  recorded  in  Pausanias 
as  having  been  erected  in  honor  of  deities,  whose  ex- 
istence is  hardly  traceable  in  the  public  and  national 
religion  of  historic  Greece.  Just  so  it  was  that  the 
heathen  system,  when  it  was  slowly  and  reluctantly 
yielding  its  ground  to  Christianity,  lingered  long  in 
the  villages  and  remoter  districts,  and  thus  gave  us,  as 
if  by  caprice,  the  singular  name  of  Paganism  for  the 
religion,  which  had  blazed  with  such  extraordinary 
splendor  in  the  Forum  of  Rome,  and  on  the  Acropolis 
of  Athens. 

i  Od.  xi.  241. 

la 


2  II.  XX.  11. 


194 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


There  is  another  form  of  relation  between  the  older 
and  the  younger  scheme.  While  the  anthropomorphic 
spirit  of  the  Olympian  religion  repels  the  counter- 
system  of  elemental  worship,  it  nevertheless  appro- 
priates its  materials,  and  even  exhibits  occasionally 
traces  of  its  form.  Thus,  while  the  air-  or  sky-god 
becomes  Zeus,  the  rainbow  becomes  Iris :  and,  as  the 
rainbow  in  nature  belongs  strictly  and  exclusively  to 
the  sky-region,  so  Iris  remains  in  the  closest  adhe- 
rence to  Zeus.  She  is  his  messenger,  not  the  mes- 
senger of  the  gods  in  general ;  and  even  when  he  sits 
on  Ida,  she  is  in  attendance  on  him,  and  available 
for  a  mission.1  And  as  we  may  suppose  that  Ida  was 
the  habitual  resort  of  Zeus  when  the  armies  were  on 
the  field,  we  can  thus  understand,  not  only  why  it  is  Iris 
who  informs  the  Trojans  about  the  Greek  array,2  but 
how  she  is  at  hand  to  prompt  Helen's  going  to  the 
Wall,3  and  to  take  Aphrodite  out  of  the  turmoil,  and 
drive  her,  in  the  chariot  of  Ares,  to  Olympos.4 

In  like  manner,  Her£  appears  to  be  constructed 
out  of  the  old  traditions  which  treated  the  Earth  as 
a  divine  power :  Demeter  from  a  like  source :  and 
Hephaistos  from  an  elemental  god  of  fire. 

If  the  local  cultus  thus  survived  in  fact  long  after 
the  central  system  had  been  eclipsed  and  superseded 
by  one  founded  on  ideas  of  greater  vigor  and  eleva- 
tion, then  Homer,  who  of  course  had  to  exercise  his 
plastic  powers  as  a  poet  upon  traditions  which  he 
found  ready  to  hand,  could  not  wholly  extinguish  the 
representation  of  these  minor  nature-powers  in  his 
Olympian  system.    And  the  ultimate  form  of  recon- 

i  II.  viii.  399.  2  II.  ii.  786. 

3  II.  iii.  121.  4  ii.  v.  353-369. 


THE  OLYMPIAN  SYSTEM. 


195 


ciliation  for  the  two  systems  was  not  in  the  ejection 
of  the  minor  powers,  but  in  the  establishment  of  their 
assumption  of  human  form,  and  with  it  the  presidency 
over  the  object  in  which  they  at  first  inhered,  as  the 
condition  of  enlistment,  so  to  speak,  in  the  popular 
religion.  Such  was  the  basis  of  compromise,  so  to  call 
it,  which  secured  to  Rivers,  Fountains,  Hills,  and 
Woods,  in  each  case  their  proper  place  in  the  Olympian 
system. 

To  obtain  a  right  view  of  its  nature,  the  Homeric 
mythology  must  be  carefully  severed,  not  only  from 
the  bygone  schemes  of  Nature-worship,  but  likewise 
from  (1)  the  Roman  mythology,  and  (2)  the  mythol- 
ogy of  classical  Greece ;  from  this  classical  system 
even  as  we  have  it  in  the  poets,  and  much  more  as  we 
draw  it  from  the  later  writers.- 

We  then  find  that  the  Homeric  formation  consists 
of  a  Polity,  framed  on  the  human  model,  with  a  king, 
an  aristocracy,  and  even  a  people  or  multitude ;  and 
that  its  seat  is  on  Olympos.  The  king  is  Zeus.  The 
aristocracy  consists  of  a  number  not  precisely  defined. 
Somewhere  about  eight  or  ten  deities  take  actual  part 
in  the  debates  of  Olympos.  The  ordinary  meetings 
are  strictly  analogous  to  those  of  the  fiovlrj  or  council 
of  the  Greek  army.  But,  like  that  council,  the  Olym- 
pian court  has  its  silent  members :  and  as  Hephaistos 
prepared  for  it  twenty  chairs1  or  thrones,  we  must 
suppose  this  to  have  been  the  approximate  number  of 
those  who  were  entitled  to  attend.  This  is  the  body, 
of  which  the  feastings  are  so  gorgeously  described  ; 
and  in  it  are,  probably,  included  all  the  deities,  who 


i  II.  xviii.  373. 


196 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


had  obtained  more  than  a  narrowly  local  recognition 
in  the  Greece  of  Homer. 

But  sometimes  the  gods  meet  in  (dyogrj')  their  As- 
sembly.1 Homer  appears  to  use  this  phrase  on  occa- 
sions when  a  great  resolution  is  about  to  be  taken. 
The  Assembly  of  the  Fourth  Book  defeats  the  Pact  of 
the  Third,  and  brings  the  Greeks  into  the  field  against 
the  Trojans  during  the  isolation  of  Achilles.  That 
of  the  Eighth  is  designed  to  insure  the  absence  of  their 
potent  patrons  from  the  field  of  battle.  Greatest  of 
all,  the  Assembly  of  the  Twentieth  Book  is  brought 
together  by  a  wider  summons,  including  Nymphs  and 
Rivers.  This  Assembly  removes  the  embargo,  and  by 
permitting  the  battle  of  the  gods,  forecasts  the  corre- 
sponding victory  of  the  stronger  party  upon  earth. 

In  the  members  of  the  Olympian  Court  itself  we 
discern  every  kind  of  heterogeneity.  There  seems  to 
be  scarcely  a  single  definite  feature  that  they  possess 
in  common:  only  we  may  assert  that  every  one  of 
them  has  a  preternatural  superiority  to  man  in  some 
one  or  more  particulars,  while  a  few  approximate  to 
divine  perfections. 

They  seem,  indeed,  in  no  case  to  be  liable  to  total 
and  final  extinction.2  Yet  Ares,  having  fled  from 
Diomed,  declares,  not  only  that  he  might  have  re- 
mained senseless  under  the  blows  of  the  warrior,  but 
might  have  suffered  (drjQov)  indefinitely  long,  left 
among  the  slain.  And  the  gods  may  be  deposed  from 
Olympos,  as  Zeus  says  he  would  have  deposed  Ares, 
if  born  from  any  other  divine  sire  than  himself. 

In  the  Fifteenth  Iliad,  Poseidon  appears   to  be 


1  II.  iv.  1 ;  viii.  2 ;  xx.  4. 


2  II.  v.  901. 


THE  OLYMPIAN  SYSTEM. 


197 


threatened  with  Tartaros,  as  the  consequence  of  the 
formidable  conflict  between  Zeus  and  himself,  which 
had  seemed  so  imminent.  The  gods  beneath,  says 
Zeus,  who  form  the  Court  of  Kronos,  would  have 
become  right  well  acquainted  with  the  battle.  As 
those  gods  are  wholly  cut  off  from  Olympian  action, 
this  could  only  have  been,  as  it  seems,  if  Zeus  had 
placed  Poseidon  where  he  had  already  placed  Kronos.1 
Even  Here  and  Athene^  may  suffer  wounds,  from 
which  ten  whole  years  will  not  suffice  for  their 
recovery.2  And  if  they  had  persisted  in  the  second 
descent,  then,  smitten  by  the  thunderbolt,  they  would 
not  have  been  again  admitted  to  Olympos.3 

The  same  notion  of  right  which  binds  men  together, 
prevails  among  the  gods,  but  may  be  set  at  nought  by 
them.4  The  happiness  of  Olympian  Immortals  is 
liable  to  be  impaired  and  disturbed  by  quarrels  on 
account  of  their  partialities  to  men  this  way  or  that, 
as  the  happiness  of  men  would  be  disturbed.5  The 
community  of  gods  is  no  less  emphatically  humanized, 
than  are  the  individuals.  The  relations  of  its  mem- 
bers to  one  another  are,  however,  but  partially  defined, 
and  are  subject  to  contingency. 

Hardly  any  two  deities  are  of  the  same  dignity  ; 
and  even  when  they  discharge  the  same  function,  they 
do  it  under  different  conditions.  Thus  Athene^  and 
Ares  are  the  deities  of  war.6  Ar£s  fights  with  his  own 
hand  against  a  mortal :  his  opponent  Athen£  does  not 
deign  to  enter  into  conflict  herself ;  she  incites 7  the 

i  II.  xv.  221-228.  2  II.  viii.  404.  3  II.  viii.  455. 

4  II.  v.  761.  5  II.  i.  573-576  ;  v.  383,  384,  and  873,  874. 

6  II.  v.  430.  1  II.  v.  124. 


198 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


mind,  drives1  the  chariot,  but  only  against  a  god,  and 
impels  or  diverts  the  weapon.2 

While  however  Athene^  thus  behaves  in  relation  to 
Ar£s,  we  have  no  similar  example  in  the  action  of  the 
Poems,  of  matters  carried  to  extremity  in  the  upper 
rank  of  the  Olympian  Court.  On  the  contrary,  the 
highest  deities  of  Homer  are  bound  together  by  a  law 
of  mutual  respect,  even  when  they  take  opposite  sides 
of  a  question  or  a  quarrel,  and  they  show  the  utmost 
anxiety  to  avoid  carrying  their  differences  to  issue. 
After  all,  is  it  not  a  folly,  they  commonly  say,  to 
diminish  our  own  happiness  on  account  of  beings  so 
inferior  to  ourselves  ? 

See  the  language  of  Zeus  to  Athene,  II.  viii.  39  ; 
Of  Zeus  about  Poseidon,  II.  xv.  226-228; 
Of  Apollo  to  Poseidon,  II.  xxi.  462-467 ; 
Of  Here  about  Zeus,  II.  viii.  427-431  ; 
Of  Athene  about  Poseidon,  Od.  xhi.  341-343  ; 
And,  although  Hermes  is  a  god  of  lower  stamp,  of 
Hermes  to  Leto,  II.  xxi.  498. 

Again,  with  a  great  delicacy,  Homer  never  allows 
any  of  the  higher  deities  to  be  named  to  mortals  as 
being  in  conflict  one  with  another.  Thus  when 
Diomed  ascribes  to  Apollo  the  escape  of  Hector,  and 
makes  an  appeal  for  himself  to  divine  aid,3  he  does 
not,  as  on  other  occasions  (e.g.  II.  x.  284),  name 
Athen£  as  his  protectress,  but  says, 

'  If  perchance  I  too  may  have  a  god  for  my  ally.' 

So  Poseidon,  in  the  form  of  Calchas,  urging  on  the  two 
Aiantes,  and  referring  to  Hector  as  claiming  to  be  the 


i  II.  v.  840. 


2  II.  v.  290,  856. 


3  II.  xi.  362-366. 


THE  OLYMPIAN  SYSTEM. 


199 


son  of  Zeus,  and  as  perhaps  having  his  aid,1  suggests 
that '  some  one  of  the  gods '  might  help  one  of  them 
to  make  an  effectual  resistance.  In  reply,  the  Oilean 
Ajax  observes  that  the  pretended  Calchas  is  some  one 
of  the  gods  of  Olympos.2  Thus  no  deity  is  placed  by 
name  in  opposition  to  Zeus. 

And  thus  it  is  contrived,  that  Poseidon  shall  retire 
from  the  field  (II.  xv.  218)  before  Apollo  arrives  there 
to  renovate  Hector  (239). 

In  the  Seventeenth  Book,  when  Athene*  3  appears, 
that  she  may  give  effect  to  the  altered  policy  of  Zeus, 
Apollo  does  not  absolutely  retire,  but  the  agency  of 
the  two  is  so  directed  as  to  avoid  collision.  For  when 
Athene^  has  incited  Menelaos,  and  Apollo  then  kindles 
Hector,  the  two  warriors  do  not  meet  in  fight.  Once 
more,  when  Achilles  (II.  xx.  450)  recognizes  the  fact 
that  Apollo  has  carried  off  Hector,  he  expresses  a  hope 
that  x)g  dewv  may  aid  him  too.  In  a  word,  the  greater 
gods  of  Homer  never  are  brought  into  conflict,  nor 
do  they  exhibit  their  differences  within  the.  human 
sphere. 

In  Book  xx,  Here  consults  Poseidon  and  Athene 
(v.  115)  as  to  the  mode  of  counteracting  the  agency 
of  Apollo,  who  is  accompanying  iEneas  against 
Achilles.  6  Let  us,'  she  says,  £  force  him  back :  and 
then  some  one  of  us  can  go  to  attend  Achilles '  (119- 
121).  Poseidon,  in  his  reply,  is  unwilling  to  bring 
gods  into  conflict, 4  unless  Ares  or  Apollo  should  begin, 
or  should  hinder  Achilles '  (132-143)  in  his  work  of 
havoc. 

And  when,  finally,  Zeus  exhibits  the  golden  scales 


i  Ii.  xiii.  54-58. 


2  II.  xiii.  68. 


3  II.  xvii.  544. 


200 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


in  the  air,  that  which  holds  the  fate  of  Hector  sinks 
to  Hades,  and  thereupon  Apollo  quits  him.  It  is  then 
only  that  Athene,  who  was  at  hand  and  ready  (see 
v.  187),  joins  and  accompanies  Achilles.1 

But  this  mutual  respect  is  only  one  among  many 
notes  of  difference,  which  separate  the  orders  of  deity 
in  the  Olympian  Court. 

The  Olympian  personages  of  Homer  may  be  divided 
into  several  classes,  in  several  respects. 

Firstly.  We  may  consider  them  as  background  and 
foreground  personages.  The  background  personages 
are  little  heard  of,  and  scarcely  affect  the  machinery 
of  government  for  the  Homeric  world.  Such  are 
Demeter,  Themis,  Leto,  Dione,  Hebe ;  such  are  the 
Muses,  and  the  Charites  or  Graces ;  independently  of 
the  Nature-powers,  who  are  summoned  to  Olympos  on 
great  and  special  occasions,  but  who  take  no  active 
part  411  superintending  human  affairs  at  large. 

Secondly.  The  foreground  personages  may  be  divided 
into  those  of  higher  and  of  lower  power. 

Of  higher  power  we  have  only  Zeus,  Here,  Poseidon, 
Athen&,  and  Apollo. 

Thirdly.  The  Olympian  deities  may  again  be  divided 
into  two  classes,  of  the  higher  and  the  lower  rjdog,  or 
moral  tone,  respectively.  The  three  first  divinities  are 
of  the  lower,  and  the  two  last  of  the  higher,  in  regard 
to  all  those  matters  which  pertain  to  the  morality  and 
to  the  infirmity,  or  dxQcccla,  of  man. 

Zeus,  in  his  Olympian  personality,  stands  with  the 
class  to  which  Herd  and  Poseidon  belong ;  while,  as 
the  traditional  representative  of  providence  and  the 


i  II.  xxii.  208-214. 


THE  OLYMPIAN  SYSTEM. 


201 


Theistic  idea,  he  ranks  more  justly  with  Athene*  and 
Apollo. 

Of  the  class  lower  both  in  power,  and  in  moral  tone, 
we  have  Hephaistos,  Ares,  Hermes,  Aphrodite. 

All,  except  the  highest  gods,  in  Homer  may  be  said 
generally  to  be  subject  to  the  following  limitations  and 
liabilities :  — 

1.  They  do  not  know  what  events  take  place  among 
men,  except  by  the  common  senses  of  sound  or  sight, 
and  when  favorably  placed ;  for  example,  when  near 
at  hand,  or  when  sound  is  loud. 

2.  They  do  not  know  what  is  in  the  mind,  and  must 
ask  to  be  informed. 

3.  They  shriek  or  cry  aloud  from  emotion. 

4.  When  they  move,  it  is  (a)  by  gradual  progres- 
sion ;  (b)  with  means  of  conveyance. 

5.  They  are  liable  to  be  hurt  and  wounded. 

6.  Human  warriors  can  contend  against  them. 

7.  Their  worship  is  peculiar  to  some  races  or  places. 

8.  They  are  even  liable  to  disparagement  in  com- 
munications held  by  the  higher  gods  with  men. 

9.  They  have  little  or  no  command  over  outward 
nature  and  the  elements. 

10.  They  do  not  habitually  repair  to  Olympos.1 

11.  Their  partialities  and  propensities  are  without 
system,  policy,  or  governing  mind. 

12.  They  neither  have  divine  foreknowledge,  nor,  in 
many  cases,  have  they  prudence  or  forethought  equal 
to  the  human. 

13.  They  are  not  able  immediately  to  influence  the 
human  mind. 

1  Where,  however,  Hephaistos  lived  (II.  xviii.  143-147) ;  but  per- 
haps for  special  reasons. 


202 


JUYENTUS  MUNDI. 


The  only  deities  who  may  be  called  absolutely  free 
from  all  these  limitations  are  Zeus,  Athend,  and 
Apollo. 

Even  Her£  is  subject  to  some  of  them  :  Poseidon  to 
more. 

Not  even  those  deities,  who  are  omnipresent  upon 
earth,  and  take  cognizance  of  all  human  affairs,  are 
precisely  informed  as  to  what  takes  place  in  the  super- 
nal region  ;  for  when  Here  sent  Iris  to  Achilles,  in  the 
Eighteenth  Iliad,1  to  urge  him  to  appear  before  the 
contending  armies,  it  was  done  without  the  knowledge 
either  of  Zeus  or  of  any  other  deity. 

Certain  special  features,  as  we  have  seen,  and  shall 
further  see,  are  traceable,  most  of  all  in  the  Athene*  and 
Apollo  of  the  Homeric  Poems,  but  also  in  Zeus,  and 
(more  forcibly)  in  Leto  and  in  Iris,  as  well  as  in  one 
or  two  other  Olympian  personages :  and  these  features, 
in  the  case  of  the  two  first-named  deities  particularly, 
impart  to  the  pictures  of  them  an.  extraordinary  eleva- 
tion and  force,  such  as  to  distinguish  them  broadly 
from  the  delineations  of  other  gods,  in  whom  these  par- 
ticular features  are  wanting.  The  features  themselves 
are  in  the  most  marked  correspondence  with  the  He- 
braic traditions,  as  conveyed  in  the  books  of  Holy  Scrip- 
ture, and  also  as  handed  down  in  the  auxiliary  sacred 
learning  of  the  Jews.  But  while  it  seems  impossible  to 
deny  the  correspondence  without  doing  violence  to  facts, 
on  the  other  hand  we  are  not  able  to  point  out  histori- 
cally the  channel  of  communication  through  which 
these  traditions  were  conveyed  into  Greece,  and  be- 
came operative  in  the  formation  of  the  Olympian 
scheme. 

i  vv.  183-186. 


THE  OLYMPIAN  SYSTEM. 


203 


At  first  sight  we  should  be  tempted  to  suppose  that 
the  Phoenician  navigators  offered  the  natural  and  prob- 
able explanation  of  any  such  phenomena.  Because, 
on  the  one  hand,  we  know,  from  the  historic  books  of 
Scripture,  that  the  Phoenicians  were  at  an  early  date  in 
habits  of  intercourse  with  the  Jews ;  while,  on  the 
other  hand,  they  not  only  were  in  like  habits  with  the 
Achaian  Greeks  of  Homer,  but  also,  as  far  as  we  can 
discern,  no  other  nation  had  a  sensible  amount  of  inter- 
course with  Greece,  or  if  there  were  such,  it  passed 
under  the  Phoenician  name. 

And  again,  there  is  one  of  the  legends  of  Homer 
with  reference  to  which  the  presumption  arises  with  a 
peculiar  force. 

Apart  from  any  disposition  to  premature  deduction 
or  imaginative  interpretation,  it  seems  obvious  to  ob- 
serve upon  the  striking  similarity  between  the  legend 
of  Bellerophon,  solicited  by  the  wife  of  Proitos,  and 
that  of  Joseph,  by  the  wife  of  Potiphar. 

And  the  great  abundance  of  tales  forming  the  outer 
circle  of  the  Odyssey,  which  (it  is  hardly  too  much  to 
say)  can  only  have  had  a  Phoenician  origin,  and  which 
touch  almost  every  point  of  the  compass  except  that 
to  the  eastward  of  Phoenicia  itself,  suggests  the  likeli- 
hood that  this  enterprising  people  would  not  be  desti- 
tute of  reports  from  that  quarter  also. 

The  name  of  Proitos,1  appearing  on  one  of  the  seven 
gates  of  Thebes,  which  mark  its  Phoenician  re-founda- 
tion, supplies  a  positive  link  between  the  legend  of 
Bellerophon  and  the  source  to  which  I  am  ascrib- 
ing it. 


1  Paus.  p.  727. 


204 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


A  second  such  link  is  supplied  by  the  written  char- 
acters, in  which  Proitos  communicated  with  the  King 
of  Lycia  respecting  Bellerophon.  The  art  of  writ- 
ing, according  to  the  later  tradition,  was  brought  by 
Phoenicians  into  Greece ;  and  the  name  of  Proitos 
distinctly  connects  the  text  of  Homer  with  that 
belief. 

Our  finding  the  family  of  Bellerophon  in  close  re- 
lations with  Proitos  tends,  of  itself,  to  induce  a.  belief 
in  their  ethnical  connection.  This  presumption  comes 
into  clearer  light  when  we  observe  that  Bellerophon 
was  an  Aiolid. 

It  must  also  be  admitted  that,  in  supposing  any  other 
channels  than  the  Phoenician  for  the  conveyance  of 
these  traditions,  we  should  force  them  up  to  a  very 
early  point  of  time,  namely,  that  of  the  separation  of 
the  Semitic,  and  the  Japhetic  or  Aryan,  branches  of 
the  human  family. 

It  is  however  admitted  that  the  Olympian  scheme 
has  for  its  distinctive  character,  or  differentia,  the  in- 
tense action  of  the  anthropomorphic  principle ;  which 
pervades  and  moulds  the  whole,  repelling,  and  as  it 
were  repudiating,  on  the  one  hand  all  abstract  specu- 
lations about  the  Deity,  on  the  other  the  worship  of 
Nature-Powers  and  of  the  animal  creation.  It  is  also 
clear,  that  some  of  the  Hebraic  traditions  were  emi- 
nently calculated  to  develop  the  anthropomorphic  prin- 
ciple. The  promise  or  expectation  of  a  Redeemer,  or 
Deliverer,  of  man,  who  should  be  at  once  human  and 
divine,  laid  a  basis  for  the  entire  system,  by  annexing 
the  glory  of  divine  attributes  to  the  corporeal  form  of 
man.  And  the  seed  thus  supplied  was  vivified,  so  to 
speak,  by  the  familiar  belief  in  the  intercourse  of  G-od 


THE  OLYMPIAN  SYSTEM. 


205 


with  the  patriarchs,  which  so  readily  adapts  itself 
to,  if  indeed  it  does  not  require,  the  use  of  a  form 
approaching  at  least  to  the  human  type. 

Every  race  had  its  own  religious  traditions.  Each 
modified,  or  kept,  or  lost  them,  in  obedience  to  its 
ruling  tendencies.  It  does  not  seem  strange  that  the 
tribe  or  tribes,  whatever  they  were,  which  brought  into 
Greek  life  and  religion  what  proved  to  be  their  central 
principle,  should  have  clung  with  a  great  tenacity  to, 
and  preserved  far  more  faithfully  than  other  races  of 
a  less  fine  composition,  those  traditions  which  were 
so  well  adapted  to  the  effective  development  of  their 
peculiar  genius. 

Among  the  Hebrews,  besides  what  has  been  en- 
shrined in  the  Sacred  Scriptures,  there  was  a  stream 
of  tradition 1  otherwise  delivered  and  relating  to  the 
Messiah,  which,  though  it  nowhere  impugns  or  even 
varies,  yet  vividly  illustrates  the  written  record.  I 
subjoin  some  particulars. 

1.  The  Messiah  was  to  be  divine. 

2.  He  was  conceived  of  as  4  the  Glory  of  God '  in 
the  feminine  gender. 

3.  The  relation  of  His  two  natures  was  set  forth  in 
the  figure  of  mother  and  daughter. 

4.  He  was  to  be  the  Logos,  the  Word  or  Wisdom  of 
God. 

5.  He  was  the  Lord  of  Hosts  —  an  idea  which 
would  naturally  take  form  in  some  martial  develop- 
ment. 

6.  He  was  especially  The  Light. 

7.  He  was  to  be  the  Mediator,  through  whom  the 
counsels  of  God  take  effect  upon  man. 

1  Studies,  vol.  ii.  pp.  48-51. 


206  JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 

8.  He  was  to  perform  miracles. 

9.  He  was  to  conquer  the  Evil  One,  and  to  lib- 
erate the  dead  from  the  grave  and  from  the  power  of 
hell. 

10.  And,  generally,  the  divine  qualities  were  all  to 
be  reflected  in  the  Messiah  (conceived  as  masculine) 
or  Shechinah  (as  feminine).1 

We  may  probably  regard  the  use  of  the  feminine 
gender  in  these  traditions  as  having  been  either  (1) 
the  most  convenient  mode  of  impersonating  an  ab- 
stract idea  of  the  Wisdom  of  God,  or  (2)  as  suggested 
by  the  arrangements  of  the  Egyptian,  or  other  Eastern 
religions. 

This  is  not  the  place  to  discuss  at  large  the  origin  of 
the  numerous  religions  which  have  existed  outside  the 
pale  of  the  Divine  revelation.  It  was  a  favorite  opin- 
ion with  the  Christian  apologists,  Eusebius  and  others, 
that  the  pagan  deities  represented  deified  men.2  Oth- 
ers consider  them  to  signify  the  powers  of  external 
nature  personified.  For  others  they  are,  in  many 
cases,  impersonations  of  human  passions  and  propen- 
sities, reflected  back  from  the  mind  of  man.  A  fourth 
mode  of  interpretation  would  treat  them  as  copies, 
distorted  and  depraved,  of  a  primitive  system  of  relig- 
ion given  by  God  to  man.  The  Apostle  St.  Paul  speaks 
of  them  as  devils  ; 3  by  which  he  may  perhaps  intend 
to  convey  that,  under  the  names  and  in  connection 
with  the  worship  of  those  deities,  the  worst  influences 
of  the  Evil  One  were  at  work.    This  would  rather  be 

1  Studies,  vol.  ii.  pp.  51-53.  Taken  principally  from  Schottgen's 
Horse  Hebraicse. 

2  See  the  Propaideia  or  Prseparatio  Evangelica  of  Eusebius,  passim. 

3  1  Cor.  x.  20. 


THE  OLYMPIAN  SYSTEM. 


207 


a  subjective  than  an  objective  description  ;  and  would 
rather  convey  an  account  of  the  practical  working  of 
a  corrupted  religion,  than  an  explanation  of  its  origin 
or  its  early  course.  As  between  the  other  four,  it 
seems  probable  that  they  all,  in  various  degrees  and 
manners,  entered  into  the  composition  of  the  later 
paganism,  and  also  of  the  Homeric  or  Olympian  sys- 
tem. That  system,  however,  was  profoundly  adverse 
to  mere  Nature-worship  ;  while  the  care  of  departments 
or  provinces  of  external  nature  were  assigned  to  its 
leading  personages.  Such  worship  of  natural  objects 
or  elemental  powers,  as  prevailed  in  connection  with 
it,  was  in  general  local  or  secondary.  And  the  deifi- 
cation of  heroes  in  the  age  of  Homer  was  rare  and 
merely  titular.  We  do  not  find  that  any  cult  or  sys- 
tem of  devotion  was  attached  to  it. 

The  preternatural  machinery  of  the  Homeric  Poems, 
besides  its  other  qualities,  is  singularly  complex  and 
comprehensive.  Its  complexity  is  doubtless  due  to  the 
fact,  that  Homer  had  to  represent  and  to  harmonize 
the  several  varieties  of  religion,  which  had  found  their 
way  into  the  country  in  company  with  immigrating 
races,  families,  or  persons.  Its  comprehensiveness  is 
owing  to  that  anthropomorphic  principle  on  which  it  is 
framed,  and  which  borrowed  from  earth,  and  carried  up 
to  Olympos,  the  state,  the  family,  and  the  individual, 
as  they  exist  among  men. 

The  bold  invention  by  which  the  gods  take  sides 
in  the  War  of  Troy,  and  decide  the  controversy  by 
main  force  in  heaven,  before  it  can  finally  be  brought 
to  issue  on  the  plain  between  the  Achaian  and  Trojan 
armies,  is  not  a  flight  of  the  imagination  only.  The 
partisanship  of  the  respective  deities,  this  way  and 


208 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


that,  is  evidently  dictated  by  sympathies  of  race. 
Neither  the  blood,  nor  yet  the  religion,  of  the  two 
countries  were  wholly  separate ;  but  differences  of 
leaning  and  of  color  between  them  may  readily  be 
discerned  upon  a  close  examination.  And  again, 
the  mode  in  which  general  rules  are  occasionally 
varied  in  the  Poems,  irresistibly  suggests  that  there 
is  a  reason  both  for  the  rule  and  for  the  exceptions  ; 
as,  for  example,  in  the  care  of  Poseidon  for  iEneas 
the  Trojan,  and  in  his  persecution  of  Odysseus  the 
Greek.  We  may  also  discern  the  marks  of  subdivided 
attachments.  The  care  of  Athene^  is  exercised  chiefly 
on  behalf  first  of  Odysseus,  next  to  him  of  Achilles, 
and  next  to  him  of  Diomed.  The  care  of  Here  is 
for  the  Pelopid  family,  and  apparently  for  the  Greeks 
as  the  people  whom  they  lead.  Irrespectively,  then, 
of  the  manifold  interest  attaching  to  the  Homeric 
mythology,  both  as  a  religion  and  as  poetry,  it  is  in 
truth  a  main  key  to  the  ethnography  of  the  Poems, 
and  even  might  on  this  account  be  taken  as  a  point  of 
departure  in  an  investigation,  which  it  influences  from 
first  to  last. 

The  personages  of  the  Homeric  Theotechny,  under 
which  name  I  include  the  whole  of  the  supernatural 
beings,  of  whatever  rank,  introduced  into  the  Poems, 
are  so  diversified  in  character,  intellect,  and  power, 
that  while  they  cannot  be  described  under  any  one 
common  form,  it  is  difficult  to  divide  them  into  classes 
with  anything  like  precision.  Into  the  following  cate- 
gories, however,  we  may  distribute  them  with  a  toler- 
able approach  to  accuracy. 

1.  The  Olympian  deities ;  recognized  and  actual 
governors,  but  with  immensely  different  titles  and 


THE  OLYMPIAN  SYSTEM. 


209 


prerogatives,  either  of  the  inner  and  Greek  world,  or 
of  the  outer  world  known  more  faintly  and  indirectly 
to  the  Greeks. 

2.  The  greater  Nature-Powers,  with  Okeanos  at  their 
head,  who  had  apparently  been  supreme  in  the  prior  or 
Pelasgian  Theogony. 

3.  The  lesser  Nature-Powers,  who  continued  to  hold 
their  ground,  at  least  in  local  influence. 

4.  Minor  deities  of  foreign  tradition,  neither  nat- 
uralized nor  acknowledged  in  Greece,  as  not  being 
of  sufficient  significance  to  claim  admission  to 
Olympos. 

5.  Rebellious  powers. 

6.  Ministers  of  Doom  and  Justice,  real  or  reputed  ; 
less  than  divinities  in  rank,  but  more  closely  associated 
with  the  moral  order. 

7.  Impersonated  ideas  connected  with  the  objects  of 
human  desire  and  aversion,  hope  and  fear. 

8.  Translated,  or  deified,  heroes. 

9.  Races  intermediate  between  gods  and  men. 
Again.    Many  elements  of  the  Hebrew  traditions 

recorded  in  the  Holy  Scriptures,  or  otherwise  preserved 
among  the  Jews  down  to  later  times,  appear  in  the 
Olympian  Court  of  Homer.  But  they  are  not  found 
in  all  the  personages  that  compose  the  assemblage  ;  nor 
even  in  all  those  deities  whom,  from  various  kinds-  of 
evidence  in  the  Poems,  we  perceive  to  have  been  fully 
recognized  as  objects  of  the  national  worship.  Further, 
in  the  characters  where  the  features  corresponding  with 
Hebrew  traditions  mainly  appear,  there  is  a  peculiar 
elevation  of  tone,  and  a  remarkable  degree  of  reverence 
is  maintained  towards  them,  so  as  to  separate  them, 
not  indeed  by  an  uniform,  but  commonly  by  a  percep- 

14 


210 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


tible  and  even  a  broad  line,  from  the  remainder  of  the 
gods. 

Besides  the  idea  of  a  Deity  which  in  some  sense 
is  three  in  one,  the  traditions  traceable  in  Homer, 
which  appear  to  be  drawn  from  the  same  source  as 
those  of  Holy  Scripture,  are  chiefly  these :  —  (1)  A 
Deliverer,  conceived  under  the  double  form,  first  of  the 
'  seed  of  the  woman '  —  a  being  at  once  Divine  and 
human ;  secondly  of  the  Logos,  the  Word  or  Wisdom 
of  God.  (2)  Next,  the  woman  whose  seed  this  Re- 
deemer was  to  be.  (3)  Next,  the  rainbow  considered 
as  a  means,  or  a  sign,  of  communication  between  God 
and  man.  And  finally  the  tradition  of  an  Evil  Being, 
together  with  his  ministers,  working  under  the  double 
form  described  by  Moloch  in  his  speech,  of 6  open  war,' 
and  of  4  wiles ;'  as  a  rebel,  and  as  a  tempter.  This 
last  tradition  is  indeed  shivered  into  fragments,  such 
as  the  giants  precipitated  into  Tartaros,  and  as  At£ 
roaming  on  the  earth ;  with  perhaps  a  portion  of  the 
idea  lodged  in  Kronos,  whose  common  and  only  de- 
scription in  Homer  is  4  Kronos  of  the  crooked  thought ' 
(ayxvloyirpjQ^) .  The  other  four  traditions  appear  to  be 
represented  in  the  persons  of  Apollo,  Athene^  Leto,  and 
Iris.  Of  course  it  by  no  means  follows  that  they  have 
no  other  origin  than  in  these  traditions,  or  that,  as 
they  stand  in  Homer,  they  represent  such  traditions 
and  nothing  else.  Iris,  for  example,  must  evidently 
be  considered  as  an  impersonation  of  a  Nature-Power. 
What  seems  to  me  undeniable  is  that,  in  the  Poems  of 
Homer,  the  traditions  I  have  named  are  at  the  least 
copiously  and  richly  embroidered  upon  the  tissue,  sup- 
plied by  other  accounts  of  the  mythological  persons 
I  have  named  ;  and  that  they  give  to  those  persons 


THE  OLYMPIAN  SYSTEM. 


211 


a  distinctiveness  of  character  and  form,  which  upon 
a  close  and  detailed  view  of  the  Olympian  system,  as 
it  is  unfolded  in  the  Poems  of  Homer,  cannot  well  be 
mistaken  by  a  painstaking  and  unprejudiced  observer. 
If,  in  the  progress  of  time,  and  with  the  mutations 
which  that  system  gradually  underwent,  the  marks  of 
correspondence  with  the  Hebrew  records  became  more 
faint,  the  fact  even  raises  some  presumption  that,  were 
we  enabled  to  go  yet  further  back,  we  should  obtain 
yet  fuller  and  clearer  evidence  of  their  identity  of 
origin  in  certain  respects. 

Even  the  highest  conception  of  deity  in  Homer  does 
not  exclude  the  element  of  fraud.  I  will  give  an 
example.  There  can  be  no  question  that  the  prize  of 
the  loftiest,  most  free,  and  most  constant  and  unvary- 
ing intelligence  in  the  whole  catalogue  of  Olympian 
deities  must  be  given  to  Athend  ;  who,  alone  among 
them,  is  never  ignorant  of  what  it  concerns  her  to 
know,  never  exposed  to  disrespect,  never  outwitted  by 
an  opponent,  never  disappointed  of  an  end.  But,  in 
the  great  crisis  of  Hector  and  Achilles,  when  the  in- 
trinsic superiority  of  the  Greek  hero  makes  him  inde- 
pendent of  any  even  more  honorable  aid,  she  descends 
to  the  mean  and  shameful  artifice  of  assuming  the  form 
of  his  brother  Deiphobos,  whom  he  especially  loved  and 
trusted,  to  induce  him  to  turn  and  meet  his  adversary.1 
This  arrangement  is  the  more  remarkable,  because 
it  is  somewhat  difficult  to  discern  the  motive  for  such 
an  intervention,  or  to  see  why  Achilles  could  not,  with 
his  extraordinary  swiftness  of  foot,  have  overtaken 
Hector  apart  from  any  assistance  whatever.  Perhaps 


i  II.  xxii.  214-247. 


212 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


it  was  an  artifice  of  the  Poet  to  uplift  the  character  of 
Hector,  of  course  in  order  to  glorify  yet  further  the 
Greek  hero,  who  was  to  overcome  him. 

Those  pure  and  lofty  traditions,  then,  which  we  are 
justly  wont  to  refer  to  a  primitive  revelation  as  their 
fountain-head,  had  already  begun  to  be  impaired.  And 
it  is  only  what  we  ought  to  expect,  if  we  find  that  with 
the  lapse  of  time  they  suffered  further  deterioration, 
and  if  the  persons  representing  them  gradually  sunk 
nearer  and  nearer  to  the  level  of  those  other  Olympian 
deities  who  had  already  in  the  time  of  Homer  lost,  or 
who  perhaps  never  had  possessed,  any  notes  of  the  sub- 
lime conceptions  which  the  Holy  Scriptures,  and  in 
some  degree  the  auxiliary  traditions  of  the  Hebrews, 
have  handed  down  to  us  in  the  greatest  purity,  and 
which  the  peculiar  genius  that  became  dominant  in 
the  Greek  religion  had,  for  a  time  at  least,  been  able 
to  preserve,  if  not  from  all  injurious  contact,  yet  from 
anything  like  absolute  immersion  in  the  mire.  The 
AthenS  and  Apollo  of  the  Olympian  system  may  be 
compared  with  the  Child  in  the  noble  Ode  of  Words- 
worth ;  about  whom,  in  his  infancy,  Heaven  is  lying, 
who  as  boy  and  youth 

Yet  by  the  vision  splendid 
Is  on  his  way  attended  ; 

but  who  in  process  of  time  parts  from  it  altogether  : 

At  length  the  man  perceives  it  die  away, 
And  fade  into  the  light  of  common  day.1 

It  is  no  part  of  the  object  of  this  work  to  institute 
a  detailed  comparison  between  the  earliest  and  the 


1  Wordsworth's  Ode  on  the  Keco'lections  of  Childhood. 

/ 


THE  OLYMPIAN  SYSTEM. 


213 


later  stages  of  the  morality  and  religion  of  the  heathen 
world ;  but  I  shall  now  state  summarily  the  results 
which  such  a  comparison  would,  I  think,  reasonably 
suggest,  so  far  as  religion  is  concerned. 

Religion  and  race  have  ever  run  much  together. 
We  find  in  Homer  the  clear  tokens  of  a  composite 
people,  and  of  a  composite  belief.  With  the  lapse  of 
time  the  edges  and  angles  of  ethnical  differences  are 
worn  down.  The  nation  and  the  creed  settle  down 
upon  an  acknowledged  platform  ;  and  the  distinctive 
features,  though  they  do  not  wholly  vanish,  take  a 
form  which  it  is  difficult  to  trace  back  to  their  first 
origin.  All  formations,  especially  if  complex,  must  be 
examined  in  their  beginnings.  The  religion  of  classical 
and  historic  Greece  is  already  an  old  religion.  The 
Poems  of  Homer  enable  us  to  investigate  its  first  in- 
ception. We  can  trace  the  very  finger  of  the  artist 
on  the  clay  he  moulded  for  his  countrymen's  behoof. 
But  as  the  nation  was  compacted  and  consolidated, 
the  component  parts  of  the  religion  also  settled  down, 
and  their  specific  differences,  like  colors  running,  lost 
all  definite  outline. 

This  loss  of  distinctive  notes  in  the  Greek  mythology 
was  a  deteriorating  and  not.  an  improving  process. 
The  gods  of  later  times  were  not  relieved  from  the 
stains  which  attach  to  them  in  Homer.  Some  legends, 
which  with  him  appear  in  a  beautiful  and  noble  shape, 
became  utterly  abominable  and  base.  While  the  level 
of  the  higher  characters  of  his  Theogony  was  reduced 
till  it  nearly  reached  that  of  the  lower,  the  level  of  the 
lower  was  in  no  way  raised.  In  the  processes  of  change, 
nothing  was  given,  all  was  taken  away. 

But  the  grand  distinction  between  the  Homeric  and 


214 


JTJVENTUS  MUNDT. 


the  later  systems  was  this :  that  the  earlier  scheme 
was  a  real,  though  it  was  a  corrupt,  religion.  It  acted 
upon  life.  It  menaced  the  excesses  of  power.  It  pre- 
scribed the  duties  of  reverence  to  age  and  authority, 
of  hospitality  to  the  stranger,  and  of  mercy  to  the 
poor.  It  had  one  and  the  same  standing  with  refer- 
ence to  all  classes.  It  did  not  assign  to  deity  that 
most  ungodlike  quality,  respect  of  persons.  But  in 
after  times,  apart  from  its  deeper  moral  stains,  it  be- 
came wholly  severed  from  the  cultured  mind  ;  and 
subsisted  mainly  as  the  jest  of  philosophers  and  men 
of  the  world,  the  tool  of  priests  and  rulers,  the  bug- 
bear of  the  vulgar. 

Again,  it  may  be  noticed  that  the  religion  of  Homer, 
subject  to  varying  closeness  of  relation  between  dif- 
ferent places  and  particular  deities,  is,  though  not  an 
uniform,  yet  an  universal  religion. 

The  Poet  evidently  supposed  that  in  some  manner 
the  Olympian  gods  governed  not.  the  Greeks  only,  but 
all  mankind.  This  perhaps  is  the  reason  why  he  has 
admitted  into  the  Olympian  family  personages  like 
Ares,  Aphrodite,  and  the  Sun,  whom  we  cannot  affirm 
to  have  been  worshipped  at  the  time  in  Greece  ;  the 
evidence  being,  indeed,  averse  to  any  such  supposition. 
This  element  of  truth  in  his  conceptions  of  Deity  is 
clearly  exhibited  by  the  banquets  provided  for  his  gods 
among  the  Aithiopes  ;  by  the  scene  of  the  Iliad,  in 
which  Zeus  turns  his  eyes  over  the  country  of  the  Hip- 
pemolgoi  and  the  Abioi ; 1  and  especially  by  this,  that, 
in  the  wide  range  of  the  Voyage  of  Odysseus,  though 
he  comes  within  the  special  jurisdiction  first  of  Posei- 


i  II.  xiii.  3-6. 


THE  OLYMPIAN  SYSTEM. 


215 


don,  and  next  of  Helios,  still  there  is  always  a  power 
of  supreme  control  lodged  in  the  Olympian  Assembly  ; 
a  power,  by  means  of  which  his  release  from  the  island 
of  Calypso  is  finally  obtained. 

It  seems  as  if  his  primitive  spirit  had  been  unable 
to  embrace  the  conception,  which  in  later  times  came 
into  vogue,  of  different  and  unconnected  deities  ruling 
different  portions  of  mankind ;  and  as  if  both  his  own 
and  the  prevailing  religious  sense  required  that,  al- 
though the  name  and  worship  of  many  among  them 
had  originally  come  from,  or  even  still  belonged  to, 
a  foreign  shore,  yet  they  should,  as  far  as  their  im- 
portance required  him  to  take  notice  of  them,  be  bound 
together  into  a  supreme  and  organized  unity.  But, 
notwithstanding,  within  the  bosom  of  this  unity  the 
character  and  associations  of  his  own  race,  which, 
without  doubt,  he  placed  at  the  head  of  all  mankind, 
were  to  be  predominant.  In  this  combination  of  ideas 
we  find  the  basis,  and  the  warrant,  of  his  Olympian 
system. 

The  collective  action  of  the  Olympian  deities  in  the 
government  of  men  is  less  infirm,  more  venerable, 
more  divine,  than  their  individual  action.  When  they 
move  together,  the  mere  idiosyncrasies,  in  which  they 
abound,  appear  to  be  in  a  great  degree  lost  and  absorbed. 
The  co-operation  of  the  three  great  Hellenizing  deities 
in  the  War  against  Troy  is,  indeed,  the  efficient  cause 
of  the  divine  decision  in  favor  of  the  Greeks.  And 
this  again  is  mythically  referred  to  a  vindictive  senti- 
ment on  the  part  of  each  of  the  men  ;  yet  the  decision 
is  a  righteous  decision.  And,  speaking  generally,  while 
the  individual  members  of  the  Olympian  Court  are 
swayed  by  hate,  lust,  and  greed,  they  have  not  any 


216 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


objects  which  they  can  pursue  in  common  for  the  grat- 
ification of  these  appetites  or  passions  ;  and  thus  is 
neutralized  the  personal  bias  which  so  frequently 
draws  them  off  the  line  of  moral  obligation,  and  more 
free  scope  is  given,  in  all  their  common  action,  to  the 
exercise  of  the  true  governing  office. 

It  is  somewhat  singular  that  we  have  not,  in  the 
true  Olympian  religion,  any  clear  instance  of  a  married 
deity,  except  Zeus.  Hephaistos  is  married  to  Aphro- 
dite only  in  the  Phoenician,  or  rather  perhaps  Syrian, 
mythology  of  the  Eighth  Odyssey.  In  the  Iliad  he  is 
but  wooing  Charis.1  That  Amphitrit£  is  the  wife  of 
Poseidon  is  a  purely  gratuitous  assumption,  and  is  in 
every  way  improbable,  since  Amphitrite  has  no  clear  or 
definite  impersonation.  Helios  and  Perse  had  children  ; 
but  they  are  wholly  within  the  Eastern  mythology. 
The  names  of  Aides  and  Persephon£  are  commonly 
combined  in  such  a  way  as  would  be  consistent  with, 
and  as  may  even  suggest,  their  being  married.  But 
this  would  scarcely  harmonize  with  his  general  arrange- 
ments, if  Demeter  was  the  mother  of  Persephone^  and 
if  Aidoneus  2  was  an  earthy  Zeus.  And  Homer  has 
carefully  avoided  using  any  words  which  would  directly 
place  them  in  this  relation.  Okeanos  and  Tethus, 
Kronos  and  Rhea,  lie  outside  the  Olympian  scheme. 

If  this  observation  be  correct,  the  fact  is  probably 
to  be  accounted  for  in  this  way :  Homer  had  no  idea 
of  a  normal  marriage  without  issue.  Where  there 
were  none,  it  was  a  heaven-sent  calamity.  He  could 
not,  then,  have  divinities  distributed  in  barren  pairs. 
But  to  have  provided  them  with  families  would  have 


1  II.  xviii.  382. 


2  See  infra,  Aidoneus. 


THE  OLYMPIAN  SYSTEM. 


217 


placed  him  in  difficulties,  such  as  may  sometimes  be 
felt  by  royalty  on  earth,  with  respect  to  the  means  of 
providing  for  a  numerous  offspring.  It  would  have 
been  difficult  to  weave  them  into  the  stock  of  tradi- 
tions which  supplied  his  raw  material.  Moreover,  as 
between  brothers  and  sisters,  the  Greek  horror  of  in- 
cest perhaps  would  ill  have  allowed  the  general  use  of 
the  idea  of  a  matrimonial  connection ;  though  Her£ 
was  the  sister  as  well  as  the  wife  of  Zeus,  and  though 
this  double  relation  was  not  at  all  foreign  to  such 
Eastern  traditions 1  as  he  had  received  through  the 
Phoenicians.  Thus  he  was  shut  up  on  all  sides  to 
arranging  his  Olympus,  as  to  its  younger  generation, 
in  the  form  of  the  single  though  manifold  family  of 
Zeus. 

Again.  Within  the  theological  system  of  Homer, 
and  as  a  kind  of  kernel  to  it,  there  lies  a  system  which 
may  be  called  one  of  deontology,  or  that  which  ought 
to  be,  and  to  be  done.  '  Will '  is  the  supreme  element 
in  the  mythological  action ;  or,  at  the  least,  it  is  in 
practice  co-ordinate  with  6  ought,'  and  it  seems  to  be 
in  conduct  the  livelier  principle  of  the  two.  But  the 
idea  conveyed  in  4  ought '  has  a  separate  sphere,  and 
ministers  of  its  own,  to  which  even  Olympian  person- 
ages pay  regard.  Its  laws  are  expressed  sometimes  in 
terms  relating  to  destiny :  most  purely  of  all  in  mtig 
and  in  vs'pemg ;  which  may  truly  be  said  to  reflect  the 
moral  sense  of  the  gods,  and  which  are  never  used  by 
Homer  to  express  a  mere  mental  emotion  of  mankind. 
They  may  convey  more  or  less  the  sense  of  an  emotion, 
but  it  is  an  emotion  always  springing  from  and  regu- 


i  Od.  x.  5-9. 


218 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


lated  by  a  regard  to  the  essential  laws  of  right,  to  the 
themistes  of  heaven.  A  third  form,  in  which  the 
dictates  of  the  moral  law  are  expressed  and  enforced, 
is  in  the  action  of  its  mute  but  ever  active  ministers, 
the  Erinues.'j 

These  topics  will  be  opened  in  their  due  order.  I 
pass  to  another  head. 

Homer  informs  us  in  the  Eighteenth  Iliad  that 
Hephaistos  was  found  by  Thetis  busy  in  finishing  a 
set  of  twenty  seats,1  for  the  members  of  the  Olympian 
Court  to  use  in  their  assemblies.  I  have  observed 
that,  with  some  allowance  for  the  vagueness  common 
with  the  Poet  in  the  use  of  figures,  we  may  take  this 
incident  as  indicating  pretty  closely  what  he  meant  to 
be  understood  as  the  number  of  the  Hi  majores,  or 
personages  qualified  to  attend  at  the  Council  (boule) 
of  the  gods. 

As  to  nearly  the  whole  of  them,  there  is  no  difficulty 
in  drawing  out  the  roll :  — - 

I.  The  children  of  Kronos :  — 


1.  Zeus  1 

2.  Poseidon     i ^ 

3.  A'ioloneus 

4.  Here 

II.  The  secondary  wives  of  Zeus  :  — 

1.  Leto  \ 

2.  Demeter     (  3 

3.  Dione  } 


i  II.  xviii.  372-377. 


THE  OLYMPIAN  SYSTEM. 


219 


III.  The  children  of  Zeus  :  — 

1.  Athene 

2.  Apollo 

3.  Hephaistos 

4.  Hermes  ^ 

5.  Artemis  f 

6.  Ares 

7.  Persephone 

8.  Aphrodite 

IV.  Personages  not  classified,  but  performing 

Olympian  offices :  — 

1.  Themis,  the  Summoner  ) 

2.  Iris,  the  Envoy  V  3 

3.  Hebe,  the  Cupbearer  ) 

18 

Besides  these  eighteen  we  have 

1.  Helios,  the  Sun,  taking  part  in  Olympian  proceed- 
ings.1 

2.  Paieon,  who  appears  to  be  ordinarily  present  there 
as  Healer.2 

Both  these  personages  came  to  be  absorbed  in 
Apollo  :  but  in  Homer  they  are  distinct  from  him : 
and,  so  far  as  the  poet  may  have  had  a  distinct 
intention  as  to  number,  these  two  have  perhaps  the 
best  claim  to  the  Nineteenth  and  Twentieth  places. 

3.  Another  claim,  making  the  Twenty-first,  is  that 
of  Dionusos  ;  whose  position,  however,  in  Homer  is 
faintly  marked  and  somewhat  equivocal.3 


i  Od.  viii.  270,  302,  and  xii.  374-376. 
3  Infra,  Chap.  VIII.  sect.  Dionusos. 


2  II.  v.  401,  899. 


220 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


On  the  whole,  we  ought  perhaps  to  reject  two  other 
names. 

1.  Eris,  or  Enuo,  the  sister  and  the  paramour  of 
Ares.1  She  grows  up,  and  this  as  it  seems  habitually, 
from  small  to  huge  dimensions.  She  remains  to  wit- 
ness the  battle  of  the  Eleventh  Iliad,  while  the  other 
deities  withdraw  to  their  Olympian  palaces  respect- 
ively.2 She  is  sent  down  to  the  camp  at  the  beginning 
of  the  same  Book,  and  shouts  from  the  ship  of  Odys- 
seus. She  is  named,  too,  together  with  Pallas,3  in 
contrast  with  the  effeminate  Aphrodite\  Yet,  on  the 
whole,  she  is  probably  no  more  than  a  vivid  poetical 
impersonation.  In  conformity  with  this  supposition, 
while  Ares  carries  a  spear  as  he  leads  the  Trojans  to 
the  fight,  she  conducts,  instead,  another  form  yet 
more  shadowy  than  her  own,  that  of  Kudoimos,  or 
Tumult. 

2.  Histie,  who  is  Yesta,  and  one  of  the  Di  majores, 
in  the  Roman  mythology,  and  who  is  also  fully  personi- 
fied in  the  post-Homeric  poetry  of  the  Greeks,  can 
scarcely  be  considered  as  a  person  in  the  view  of 
Homer.  There  are  indeed  invocations  to  her  name,4 
which  signifies  4  the  hearth,'  in  the  Odyssey ;  but  in 
three  cases  out  of  the  five  it  is  combined  with  that  of 
the  table  for  guests. 

i  II.  iv.  441.  2  ii.  Xi.  3,  4,  73.  s  II.  v.  333,  592. 

4  Od.  xiv.  159  ;  xvii.  156 ;  xix.  304 ;  xx.  231. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 


The  Divinities  of  Olympos. 

Section  I.  Zeus. 

Zeus  presents  to  us  a  character  more  heterogeneous 
and  less  consistent  than  that  of  any  other  Homeric 
deity. 

He  claims  a  strength  superior  to  the  united  strength 
of  all  the  gods ; 1  yet  he  admits  that  he  would  have 
some  difficulty2  in  putting  down  Poseidon  singlehand- 
ed ;  and  he  was  actually  delivered  by  a  giant 3  from 
fetters  into  which  he  had  been,  or  was  about  to  be, 
thrown  by  a  combination  of  that  god  with  Athend  and 
Herd. 

In  many  points  he  inherits  the  traditions,  and  is 
formed  upon  the  conception,  of  the  One  and  Supreme 
God.  Yet  he  was  one  of  three  brothers,  who  had 
parents  preceding  them :  the  three  were  born  to  equal 
honor:4  lot  alone  decided  their  several  domains. 
Seniority  gives  Zeus  the  first  place :  yet  the  filial  tie 


i  II.  viii.  17-27. 
3  II.  i.  399-406. 


2  H.  xv.  228. 
4  II.  xv.  209. 


222 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


had  not  prevented  him  from  imprisoning  his  own  father 
in  perpetuity.  He  is  alike  the  depository  of  high  moral 
ideas,  and  of  intense,  as  well  as  of  debased,  human 
attributes.  He  bears  many  different  characters ;  and 
no  one  of  them  is  altogether  consistent  with  the  rest. 

There  are  five  different  capacities  in  which,  in  order 
to  embrace  the  entire  picture  drawn  by  the  Poet,  he 
must  be  regarded.  Four  of  them  are  Olympian :  one 
appertains  to  an  earlier  theogonic  scheme. 

1.  Zeus  is  the  meeting-point  of  the  Pelasgic  with 
the  Olympian  or  Hellenic  system  of  religion. 

2.  He  is  the  depository  of  the  principal  remnants  of 
monotheistic  and  providential  ideas. 

3.  He  is  the  sovereign  lord  of  meteorological  phe- 
nomena. 

4.  He  is  the  head  of  the  Olympian  Court. 

5.  He  is  the  most  marked  receptacle  of  all  such 
earthly,  sensual,  and  appetitive  elements  as,  at  the 
time  of  Homer,  anthropophuism  had  obtruded  into  the 
sphere  of  deity. 

On  the  epithets  and  verbal  ascriptions  of  Zeus,  we 
may  observe, 

1.  That  they  much  exceed  in  number  and  variety 
those  of  any  other  deity. 

2.  That  with  few  and  special  exceptions  they  are 
applied  to  him  exclusively. 

3.  That  they  divide  themselves  into  classes  accord- 
ing as  they  belong  to  him, 

a.  In  respect  of  national  or  special  worship,  as 
Dodonaios,  Idaios,  Pelasgicos,  Olumpios. 

b.  In  respect  of  his  chief  place  in  the  Hellenic  theo- 
gony,  as  air- god :  such  as  doreQOTtrit^g,  vsyzlrjysQ&tjg, 
'Aelaivscpijg,  reQTtMtQavvog,  tglybovnog,  evQvomjg. 


THE  DIVINITIES  OF  OLYMPOS. 


223 


c.  In  respect  of  his  character  as  the  Providence  and 
Governor  of  mankind,  and  the  defender  of  social  and 
moral  laws :  such  as  dzwv  vTtaxog  %ai  aqioiog,  narijQ  dv- 
Sqojv  ts  dear  rs,  (xrtrisr?]g,  ^eiviog,  txettjotog :  highest  and 
best  of  gods,  father  of  gods  and  men,  the  Zeus  of 
counsel,  the  Zeus  of  the  guest,  the  Zeus  of  the  sup- 
pliant. 

Let  us  now  proceed  to  this  fivefold  observation  of 
the  Homeric  Zeus. 

1.  The  Pelasgian  Zeus. 

At  times,  the  Zeus  of  Homer  appears  to  border  upon 
the  mere  Nature-Power :  as  in  the  epithet  /JiiTzezrjgj 
'  falling  from  Zeus,'  applied  to  rivers :  in  "Evdiog, 
meaning  '  at  noontide,'  and  recalling  the  '  sub  dio,  sub 
Jove,'  of  the  Latins.  Also  the  expressions,  Aiog  o^Qog, 
avyai,  vicpddsg,  (oqcci,  the  rain,  rays,  snow-flakes,  hours  or 
seasons  of  Zeus,  may  all  be  compared  with  analogous 
expressions  applied  to  Demeter  and  to  Hephaistos. 
We  may  consider  all  these  as  being,  in  their  various 
shades,  relics  of  the  Pelasgian  worship  of  Nature- 
Powers. 

We  may  in  fact  either  consider  the  Pelasgian  Zeus, 
and  the  Zeus  of  the  anthropomorphic  system,  as  one 
or  as  two.  It  is  probable  that  two  separate  clusters 
of  tradition  may  have  belonged  to  the  same  name,  and 
that  in  time  they  coalesced  together,  in  obedience  to 
the  law  of  public  feeling,  combined  with  their  respect- 
ive internal  aptitudes.  And  this  condition  may  have 
been  the  solution  no  less  of  a  great  ethnical  than  a 
great  mythological  question. 

According  to  the  legend  of  Thetis,  in  the  First  Iliad, 
there  was  a  time  when  Here,  Poseidon,  and  Athen& 


224 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


combined  to  put  him  in  bonds.  He  was  saved  from 
this  peril  by  Thetis,  who  fetched  Briareus,  or  Aigaion 
of  the  Hundred  Hands,  to  his  aid.  This  giant  was 
stronger  than  his  father  Poseidon,  and  on  his  arrival 
the  plan  was  abandoned.  Of  the  three  deities  named, 
Here  and  Athene^  are  eminently  Hellenic,  and  Poseidon 
appears  to  be  Phoenician.  The  meaning  of  the  legend 
therefore  probably  is,  that  the  supremacy  of  the  old, 
and  perhaps  purely  elemental,  Zeus  of  the  Pelasgians 
was  endangered  by  the  arrival  of  the  Phoenician  and 
Hellenic  immigrants  with  their  respective  religious 
associations :  but  that  an  accommodation  was  after- 
wards effected,  and  a  Zeus  acknowledged,  who  suffi- 
ciently took  into  himself  the  Pelasgian  element. 

The  Zeus  of  Homer  is  the  Pelasgic  Zeus,  and  the 
Zeus  of  Dodona ;  and  he  is  also  worshipped  by  the 
Helloi.1  These  Helloi  appear  to  represent  the  Hellenic 
race  in  its  pre-Hellenic  form  ;  and  the  Pelasgian  name, 
with  that  of  Dodona,  places  the  throne  of  Zeus  within 
the  shadows  of  the  pre-Hellenic  period.  It  is  true  that, 
in  the  Theogony  of  Homer*  this  deity  has  ancestors 
and  antecessors :  and  he  alone,  of  the  family  of  gods 
proper  to  the  Pelasgians,  is  carried  over  at  once  into 
the  Hellenic  and  Olympian  system.  This  may  have 
been  both  because,  as  the  god  of  air  and  light,  he  an- 
swered best  among  them  to  that  more  abstracted  and 
less  materialized  conception  of  Deity  which  the  Hel- 
lenic mind  required ;  and  because  there  clustered 
around  him  whatever  traditions  of  a  supreme  and 
single  Being  the  world  of  human  thought  had  either 
fashioned  or  retained.    In  any  case  it  is  plain  that  the 


1  II.  xvi.  233-235. 


THE  DIVINITIES  OF  OLYMPOS. 


225 


Poet,  having  got  rid  of  all  claims  of  priority  by  relegat- 
ing the  Nature-Powers  to  the  Underworld,  or  to  the 
sea-floor,  or  to  the  extremities  of  the  earth,  is  thus 
enabled  to  leave  his  Zeus  firmly  grounded  in  authority 
as  the  senior  god  of  the  Olympian  system.  And  this 
claim  of  seniority  is  the  true  basis  of  his  supremacy. 
To  this  it  is,  and  by  no  means  to  mere  excess  of  force, 
that  Poseidon  defers  in  the  Fifteenth  Iliad,  as  to  a 
claim  profoundly  rooted  in  that  moral  order,  which 
even  gods  acknowledge  and  respect. 

It  is  at  the  stage  where  the  Past,  having  been  be- 
fore only  cloud  and  mist,  becomes  for  Homer  that 
shaped  tradition  which  occupied,  relatively  to  his  time, 
the  place  of  History,  that  Zeus  offers  to  the  mind  of 
the  Greek  hearer  the  earliest  definite  point  upon 
which  understanding  and  memory  can  fix,  so  that  he 
can  be  chosen  as,  for  practical  purposes,  the  origin  to 
which  all  things  are  to  be  traced  up  and  referred. 

It  seems  likely  that  this  priority  of  Zeus  may  lie  at 
the  root  of  his  preference  f or  Troy  :  a  state  and  people 
in  which  we  discern  the  predominance  of  a  mere  Pelas- 
gian  character,  and  where  the  royal  family  mounts  to  a 
greater  antiquity  than  that  of  any  properly  Hellenic  or 
Achaian  race. 

2.  The  Divine  Zeus. 

To  Zeus  as  Providence  belong  both  a  number  of  sep- 
arate ascriptions,  and  a  general  position,  which  under- 
lies the  whole  action  of  the  Iliad.  The  grandeur  of  his 
figure  and  attributes  transcends  every  other  composi- 
tion. He  is  identified,  in  perhaps  an  hundred  places  of 
the  Poems,  with  the  word  theos,  in  its  more  abstracted 
signification  as  Providence,  or  the  moral  governor  of 

15 


226 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


the  world.  He  is  the  rapfyg  TtoXsfjtow,  the  arbiter  of 
war :  and  he  exhibits  in  the  sky,  on  great  occasions, 
the  scales  in  which  are  weighed  contending  fates.  He 
is  the  source  of  governing  authority,  and  he  shows  his 
displeasure  when  it  is  abused.1  He  is  the  distributor 
in  general  of  good  and  evil  among  mortals  ;  for  it  is  on 
his  floor  that  the  two  caskets2  stand,  from  which  are 
dispensed  the  mixed  and  the  unmixed  lots  of  men. 
He  has  the  care  of  the  guest,  the  suppliant,  and  the 
poor ;  and  thus  his  name  becomes  the  guarantee  for 
three  relations,  which  were  and  are  fundamental  to 
the  condition  of  mankind,  considered  with  reference  to 
social  existence.  Indeed,  in  this  character  he  is  him- 
self a  source  of  Destiny,  as  we  find  from  the  remark- 
able phrase  z/t<v  aha,  the  fate  of,  or  proceeding  from, 
Zeus. 

Zeus  approximates  to,  and  perhaps  possesses,  an 
ubiquitous  or  universal  supremacy.  Hellic  and  Pelas- 
gian,  Idaian  and  Olympian,  he  leads  the  band  of  the 
Immortals  to  feast  during  an  eleven  days'  absence  on 
the  sacrifices  offered  by  the  Aithiopes  or  Ethiopians, 
who  occupied  the  whole  southern  line  of  the  world  of 
Homer : 3  and  he  likewise,  in  an  interval  of  his  cares 
respecting  Troy,  casts  his  eyes  in  the  far  north  not 
only  over  Thracians  and  Mysians,  but  over  Hippemol- 
goi  and  Abioi.4  His  name  is  likewise  acknowledged 
in  the  border  land  of  Scherie,  and  in  the  outer  sphere 
where  Poseidon  rules :  for,  say  the  brother  Cyclops  to 
the  brutal  Poluphemos,  '  Disease  comes  from  the  mighty 
Zeus,  and  cannot  be  escaped :  pray  however  to  thy  fa- 
ther the  lord  Poseidon.' 5  From  this  passage  we  perceive 

i  II.  xvi.  387.  2  II.  xxiv.  527.  a  Od.  i.  23. 

4  II.  xiii.  1-6.  5  Od.  ix.  411. 


THE  DIVINITIES  OF  OLYMPOS. 


227 


that  Zeus  was  not  for  Homer  a  mere  name  for  Po- 
seidon in  his  own  kingdom,  as  A'idoneus  is  called  4  the 
Zeus  beneath.' 1  The  meaning  more  nearly  approaches 
to  a  recognition  of  the  Providential  character  of  Zeus, 
as  contradistinguished  from  his  Olympian  capacity.  In 
this  larger  conception  his  individual  existence  at  times 
appears  almost  wholly  to  merge. 

Zeus,  however,  although  no  positive  limits  are  affixed 
to  his  capacities  of  perception  and  knowledge,  does  not 
as  a  matter  of  course  perceive  all  that  is  going  on 
among  mortals.  By  an  expedient  of  some  naivete,  he 
turns  his  eyes  away  from  Troy  towards  Thrace  and  the 
righteous  nations  of  the  North,  when  Poseidon  is  about 
to  come  into  the  field.  This  god,  assuming  a  disguise, 
remains  there  long  without  being  observed,  although 
the  sleep  of  Zeus  has  not  yet  come.2 

And  again,  to  save  the  body  of  Patroclos,  Here 
sends  Iris  on  a  mission  to  Achilles,  which  is  concealed 
from  Zeus  as  well  as  from  the  other  gods 3  (xQvfida  Jiog 
akXfov  re  Omv^). 

After  the  Theomachy  also,  he  inquires  of  Artemis 
who  it  was  that  had  maltreated  her.  Yet  he  had  seen, 
and  had  exulted  in  seeing,  the  gods  as  they  engaged  in 
conflict.4 

Besides  these  physical  limitations,  Zeus  is  subject  to 
deceit.  He  is  entrapped  by  Here  through  the  medium 
of  his  passion,5  and  is  lulled  into  a  sleep,  in  order  that 
during  his  inaction  his  decree  may  be  disobeyed.  In 
like  manner6  that  goddess  had  completely  outwitted 
him  at  the  time  of  the  birth  of  Heracles,  by  obtaining 
a  promise  on  behalf  of  a  descendant  of  his  who  was  to 

1  II.  ix.  457.       2  II.  xiii.  1-16,  352-356.       3  n.  xviii.  165-169. 
4  II.  xxi.  389,  508.         5  II.  xiv.  352.  6  u.  xix.  97  seqq. 


228 


JUYENTUS  MUNDI. 


be  born  on  that  day,  and  by  then  accelerating  the  birth 
of  Eurustheus  in  Argos,  and  stopping  that  of  Heracles 
in  Thebes. 

On  certain  occasions,  we  find  Zeus  acting  as  supreme 
and  single-handed,  neither  against  nor  with  the  Olym- 
pian assembly.  The  grandest  of  these  is  at  the  close 
of  the  Odyssey.1  Athen£,  stimulated  by  her  sympa- 
thizing keenness,  appears  to  have  winked  at  the  natural, 
but  vengeful,  disposition  of  Odysseus  towards  his  un- 
grateful and  rebellious  subjects.  Zeus,  who  had  pre- 
viously counselled  moderation,  launches  his  thunder- 
bolt ;  and  it  falls  at  the  foot  of  Athene,  who  thereupon 
gives  the  required  caution  to  the  exasperated  sover- 
eign.   Peace  immediately  follows.2 

He  has  also  this  marked  and  paramount  distinction, 
that  he  never  descends  to  earth  to  execute  his  own  pur- 
poses, but  in  general  sends  other  deities  as  his  organs, 
to  give  effect  to  his  will,  or  else  operates  himself  from 
afar,  by  signs,  or  by  positive  exertions  of  the  power 
which  he  possesses  as  god  of  air. 

Zeus,  however,  is  not  absolutely  omnipresent;  for 
his  journey,  and  his  consequent  absence  from  Olym- 
pos,  are  described.3  But,  unlike  the  case  of  Poseidon, 
we  have  no  detail,  no  succession  in  his  movement. 
Again,  unlike  Poseidon,  he  hears  prayer  irrespective 
of  the  particular  place  or  point  from  which  it  is  offered. 

3,  4.   The  Olympian  Zeus,  and  the  Lord  of  Air. 

The  chief  agency  of  Zeus  in  the  Poems  is  as  head  of 
the  Olympian  family  and  Court. 

In  this  character  he  is  the  governor  of  the  air  and 


i  Od.  xxiv.  481,  525-541,  546. .  2  Od.  xxiv.  546. 

3  II.  i.  420-425. 


THE  DIVINITIES  OF  OLYMPOS. 


229 


all  its  phenomena  ;  the  eldest  of  the  trine  brotherhood, 
and  the  owner  of  the  Aigis,  which  is  the  symbol  of 
sovereign  power,  like  the  crown,  or  sword  of  state,  in 
an  European  kingdom.  To  him  the  gods  rise  up  at 
their  meetings.  Though  he  swears,  as  other  deities 
do,  in  confirmation  of  his  word,  we  have  no  details  as 
to  the  form :  but  we  know  that  the  highest  mode  of 
conveying  his  will  and  word  is  by  the  nod  peculiar  to 
himself.1 

Besides  those  offices  in  relation  to  the  air,  which  are 
more  capable  of  an  elemental  interpretation,  he  com- 
mands the  clouds,  the  tempests,  the  winds,  the  thun- 
der and  lightning,  the  years  ;  he  impels  the  falling 
star,  or  launches  the  thunderbolt.2  All  signs  in  air 
belong  to  him,  as  does  especially  the  rainbow,  which  he 
planted  in  the  clouds.3  Iris,  accordingly,  is  his  per- 
sonal messenger  in  the  Olympian  Court.  And  when 
any  of  the  attributes  belonging  to  the  region  of  air  are 
employed  by  other  deities,  it  is  in  virtue  of  a  special 
relation  to  him.  These  partners  of  his  power  appear 
to  be,  exclusively  of  the  rest,  Here  as  his  wife  ;  with 
AthenS  and  Apollo,  in  virtue  of  moral  and  traditional 
relations  with  the  Supreme  Deity,  belonging  to  them 
respectively. 

The  arrangement  of  the  trine  brotherhood  seems  to 
bear  peculiar  marks  of  a  traditional  origin.  For,  be- 
sides the  division  of  power  between  three,  the  mode  is 
remarkable.  The  Greek  ideas  and  practice  were 
founded,  more  or  less,  on  primogeniture.  Yet  it  is  by 
lot  that  Zeus  receives  the  air,  Poseidon  the  sea,  Ai'do- 
neus  the  Underworld.    This  method  of  division  is  evi- 


1  II.  i.  524-530.    Compare  Hebrews,  vi.  13. 

2  Od.  xii.  415-417  ;  xxiv.  549. 


3  II.  xi.  27. 


230 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


dently  meant  to  save  the  principle  of  equality,  which 
the  Poet  thus  curiously  interweaves  with  the  supe- 
riority of  Zeus. 

For,  as  the  head  of  the  Olympian  Court,  it  is  clear 
that  Zeus  is  stronger  than  any  single  god.  It  is  in 
doubt  whether  he  is,  as  he  boasts,  stronger  than  the 
whole.  We  see  that  at  a  former  period  three  were 
able  to  coerce  him.  Perhaps  we  are  to  understand 
this  legend  as  referring  to  a  period  of  crisis :  the  con- 
ditions of  human  life  may  enter  into  the  problem,  and 
his  sovereignty  may  be  meant  to  be  understood  as  one 
which  when  once  vindicated,  became  resistless,  and. 
was  thoroughly  consolidated  by  time.  His  superiority, 
however,  must  in  the  last  resort,  like  that  of  other 
governors,  be  maintained  by  main  force,1  when  per- 
suasion or  verbal  command  has  failed.  Nor  could  it  be 
exercised  over  the  great  Poseidon  without  a  struggle.2 
Here  and  Athene,  however,  single  or  combined,  he 
threatens  freely ;  and  the  first  of  these  he  liad  once 
punished  with  severity.3 

Of  omnipotence,  properly  so  called,  Homer  does  not 
seem  to  have  embraced  the  idea.  To  this  height,  in- 
deed, even  the  philosophy  of  the  ancients  never  as- 
cended. But  none  of  the  epithets  of  Zeus  go  so  far  as 
to  express  it,  even  in  forms  which  might  be  supposed 
figurative. 

The  headship  of  Zeus,  however,  is  established  not 
only  in  superior  force  but,  as  has  been  shown,  by 
special  marks  of  respect,  and  by  symbols  of  sover- 
eignty :  it  may  be  added,  by  the  general  deference  of 
the  gods.    Other  tokens  are  observable.    There  is  no 


i  II.  xv.  164-167. 


2  II.  xv.  228. 


3  II.  xv.  18. 


THE  DIVINITIES  OF  OLYMPOS. 


231 


patronymic  among  the  gods,  except  that  of  Zeus  him- 
self. And  further,  in  the  Olympian  system  proper, 
there  is  no  god  born  of  any  divine  sire  other  than 
Zeus  ;  nor  any  god  born  of  a  goddess,  except  he  be 
the  father  ;  nor  any  god  born  of  a  human  mother. 

Again,  he  is  undisguisedly  the  arbiter  among  the 
gods.  Here  appeals  to  him  on  the  conduct  of  Ares, 
and  he  permits  his  Queen  to  let  loose  Athene  on  the 
Trojans.1  Ares,  when  wounded,  carries  his  complaint 
to  Zeus  ; 2  and  Artemis  also  sits  on  his  knee  and  makes 
known  to  him  her  woes.3  This  office,  as  a  kind  of 
judgeship  in  appeal,  is  a  great  stay  to  the  power  of 
Zeus. 

This  headship  of  Zeus  in  the  Olympian  polity  is  not 
merely  ornamental ;  it  entails  the  weight  of  govern- 
ment. The  careful  reader  of  the  Iliad  will  be  struck 
by  the  resemblance  between  his  position  among  the 
gods,  and  that  of  Agamemnon  in  the  circle  of  his 
chieftains.  As  heralds  upon  earth  are  his  messengers, 
so  it  is  at  his  command  that  a  messenger  goes  to  sum- 
mon the  Olympian  assemblies  :  he  commonly,4  though 
not  universally,5  introduces  the  subject  of  discussion, 
and,  so  to  speak,  manages  the  debate.  He  also  feels 
the  burden  of  government  over  man,  when  the  divine 
Assemblies  are  not  in  session.  After  the  gorgeous 
scene  of  the  banquet  in  the  First  Iliad,  the  other  gods 
slept,  but  Zeus  slept  not;  he  had  in  his  hands  the 
charge  of  the  Executive,  and  he  summoned  Dream  to 
do  his  bidding.6 

The  idea,  to  which  we  give  the  name  of  responsi- 

1  II.  r.  765.  2  ii.  v.  872. 

3  II.  xxi.  705.  *  II.  iv.  7  ;  viii.  41  ;  Od.  i.  32. 

5  II.  xx.  13.  6  ii.  ii.  i_7> 


232 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


bility,  is  represented  in  Zeus,  and  in  him  only.  Other 
gods  appear  in  the  movement  of  the  Iliad  with  an  in- 
termittent agency.  But  it  is  Zeus  who  is  charged 
with  the  general  conduct  of  affairs,  with  seeing  that 
the  government  of  the  world  is  carried  on.  There  is 
no  better  example  of  this,  than  in  the  Olympian  As- 
sembly at  the  opening  of  the  Odyssey.  Odysseus  is  at 
the  time  detained  by  Calypso  in  the  Island  of  Ogugie\ 
The  care  of  Athene*  does  not  reach  to  him,  because  he  is 
in  the  Outer  world,  under  the  government,  apparently, 
of  Poseidon,  his  great  enemy.  Meanwhile,  his  sub- 
stance is  wasted,  and  his  wife  tormented,  by  the  dis- 
solute Suitors.  All  this  exhibits  a  sad  rent  in  the 
established  terrestrial  order.  Consequently  the  gods 
in  general  are  affected  with  compassion.1  But  it  is  the 
business  of  Zeus  to  introduce  the  subject  to  them,  for 
their  opinion  and  decree. 

At  the  same  time  we  must  observe  the  skill  with 
which  he  manages  the  Assembly.  He  avoids  placing 
himself  in  conflict  with  Poseidon  by  any  hasty  assump- 
tion of  the  initiative ;  and  only  gives  his  sanction  to 
the  plan  of  the  Return,  when  Athene  has  complained 
of  the  detention,  and  thrown  the  responsibility  of  this 
evil  upon  Zeus.2  We  may  observe  a  like  refinement 
in  the  Assembly  of  the  Fourth  Iliad.  The  real  object 
of  Zeus  in  that  Assembly  is  to  draw  the  Greeks  into 
the  field,  which  can  only  be  done  by  bringing  about  a 
breach  of  the  Pact  of  the  Third  Book.  And  this  must 
be  done  by  the  Trojans,  since  the  Achaians  were 
keepers  of  their  oaths.  But  his  mode  of  action  is  to 
propose  that  the  accommodation  just  effected  shall 


i  Od.  i.  19. 


2  Od.  i.  62,  76. 


THE  DIVINITIES  OF  OLYMPOS. 


233 


be  made  permanent,  and  that  Troy  shall  continue  to 
subsist.  For  he  knows  very  well,  that  this  will  put 
the  Hellenizing  deities  upon  proposing  a  scheme  for 
the  renewal  of  the  war,  and  thus  that  they  will  save 
him  from  giving  offence  to  those  of  the  Trojan 
party. 

It  is  not  only  in  the  individual  characters  and  the 
family  order,  but  also  in  the  general  form  of  the  polity 
of  Olympos,  that  we  may  trace  the  anthropomorphic 
spirit  of  the  Homeric  religion.  That  polity  is  more 
aristocratic  than  monarchical.  It  does  not  exclude  the 
idea  of  coercion,  even  as  applied  to  Zeus  himself ;  for 
he  was  put  in  chains  by  the  united  action  of  Here, 
Athene^  and  Poseidon.1  Upon  the  whole,  notwith- 
standing the  mutterings  of  Poseidon  in  the  Fifteenth 
Iliad,  the  superiority  of  Zeus  to  any  single  deity  is 
sufficiently  established.  But  although  he  boasts,  that  he 
is  able  to  overcome  in  mere  force  the  whole  Assembly,2 
it  is  incontestable  that  the  will  which  ultimately  pre- 
vails is  that  of  the  body,  and  not  of  the  individual  who 
is  its  head.  His  effort3  to  obtain  a  more  favorable 
solution  entirely  fails.  Homer  indeed  has  balanced 
the  question  with  his  usual  adroitness  ;  for,  as  far  as 
the  comparatively  narrow  plot  of  the  Iliad  is  concerned, 
Zeus  effects  his  purpose  of  glorifying  Achilles,  by  the 
temporary  success  of  the  Trojans  whom  he  loved. 
But  it  is  the  Battle  of  the  gods,  and  the  decisive  supe- 
riority of  the  Hellenizing  deities,  which  foreshadows, 
and  makes  way  for,  the  victory  of  Achilles  over  Hector. 
And,  as  regards  the  general  issue  of  the  War,  it  is 
evident  that  the  preference  of  Zeus  lies  with  the  Tro- 


i  II.  i.  399-401. 


2  II.  viii.  18-27. 


3  II.  iy.  14-19. 


234 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


jans  and  not  with  the  Greeks.  It  is  then  the  prevailing 
sense  of  the  Olympian  Court,  already  represented  to  us 
in  the  Theomachy  under  the  form  of  physical  force, 
which  determines  the  doom  of  Troy,  and  determines  it 
in  conformity  with  justice,  but  clearly  against  the  bias, 
if  not  the  outspoken  will,  of  Zeus. 

5.  Zeus  the  type  of  anthropomorphism. 

The  framework  of  the  Olympian  system  is  in  itself 
the  most  imposing  form  of  development  ever  given  to 
the  principle  of  anthropomorphism ;  that  principle 
which,  to  define  it  briefly,  casts  the  divine  life  into 
human  forms.  This  is  effected  by  Homer  with  refer- 
ence to  all  the  main  relations  of  life  ;  the  State,  the 
family,  and  the  individual.  The  State  is  represented 
by  the  Olympian  polity  as  a  whole.  The  relations  of 
the  deities  among  themselves  are  all  thrown  into  the 
form  of  the  family.  Perhaps  it  was  the  sheer  necessity 
of  the  case,  perhaps  the  fact  that  the  stream  of  tradi- 
tion came  from  the* East,  which  carried  with  it  the  con- 
sequence that,  while  the  Greek  family  was  thoroughly 
normal,  the  family  of  the  Greek  gods  was  based  upon 
polygamy,1  and  upon  polygamy  attended  with  what 
would  among  men  be  deemed  a  license  yet  more  re- 
laxed. In  truth,  it  is  the  domestic  organization  of 
Troy,  rather  than  of  Greece,  which  supplies  the  earthly 
original  from  which  the  family  in  Olympos  is  a  copy  ; 
although  this  is  a  feature  accidental  in  reference  to  the 
main  design. 

For,  in  Olympos,  we  have  Zeus  with  Her£  as  his 
principal  wife  ;  with  Leto,  Dione,  and  perhaps  De- 


i  II.  xxi.  499. 


THE  DIVINITIES  OF  OLYMPOS. 


235 


meter,  as  the  secondary  or  subordinate  wives.  In  the 
rear  of  these,  came  all  the  persons  who  were  the  sub- 
jects of  his  adulterous  intrigues  on  earth.  Here  alone 
is  the  Queen,  who  by  reflection  attracts,  and  who 
exercises,  though  with  a  contracted  power,  the  air- 
governing  prerogatives  of  her  husband.  The  other 
goddesses  I  have  named  are  personages,  differing  in 
dignity,  but  agreeing  in  this,  that  they  are  mute  and 
blind  in  reference  to  the  governing  office. 

While  the  Olympian  Court,  and  Zeus  as  its  head, 
present  to  our  view  the  weight  of  political  care,  and 
are  commonly  seen  working  for  good,  the  individual 
character  of  Zeus  is  of  a  far  lower  order  than  his  public 
capacity  would  lead  us  to  expect.  Into  this  there 
enters  almost  as  much  of  Falstaff,  as  of  Lear  into  the 
character  of  Priam.  The  basis  of  it  is  radically  Epi- 
curean. A  profound  attachment  to  ease  and  self-en- 
joyment is  its  first  governing  principle.  Except  for 
his  pleasures,  and  indeed  with  a  view  to  indulging  in 
them,  he  never  disturbs  the  established  order ;  and  he 
resents  in  a  high  degree  the  fiery  restlessness,  as  well 
as  the  jealousy,1  of  Here.  The  sacrificing  man  is  the 
pious  man  :  but  the  love  of  Zeus  for  such  men  appears 
to  be  closely  associated  with  the  animal  enjoyment  of 
the  libation  and  the  reek.2  To  avoid  trouble,  he  acqui- 
esces in  the  death  of  Sarpedon,  whom  he  singularly 
loves:  he  dreads  to  give  offence  to  the  goddess  of 
Night ; 3  and  he  hesitates  to  grant  the  request  of  Thetis, 
notwithstanding  the  debt  of  gratitude  he  owes  her. 
And  generally  he  hates  those  gods  who  trouble  him, 
and  in  proportion  as  they  trouble  him ;  especially  his 
son  Ares.4 

1  II.  i.  562.  2  II.  iv.  48,  49 ;  xxiv.  69,  70. 

3  II.  xiv.  261.  *  ii.  v.  890. 


286 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


He  is  not,  indeed,  devoid  of  affections  ;  for  he  is 
moved  by  pity,  now  for  Agamemnon  or  a  Greek  chief- 
tain, now  for  Priam ; 1  and  he  is  wrung  with  genuine 
grief,  as  a  father,  for  Sarpedon,  over  whom  he  even 
weeps  tears  of  blood.2  But  he  delights  to  sit  on  Garga- 
ros,  and  there  to  behold  the  bloody  spectacle  of  the 
war ;  he  keenly  longs  to  see  the  ships  on  fire ;  he 
anticipates  a  lively  pleasure  from  witnessing  the  very 
gods  in  conflict  with  one  another.3  Not  only  does  he 
rejoice  in  the  feast,  but  he  glows  with  sexual  passion, 
and  he  is  subject  to  the  power  of  Sleep,  although  that 
deity  can  only  subdue  him  by  working  hard,  and  more- 
over somewhat  at  his  peril,  so  that  Here  is  obliged  to 
bribe  him  with  a  high  reward,  promised  under  the 
sanction  of  an  oath.4 

In  a  word,  Zeus  is  the  masterpiece  of  the  Homeric 
mythology,  if  we  consider  it  with  reference  to  that 
humanizing  or  anthropomorphic  element,  which  gave  to 
the  religion  of  Greece  its  specific  national  character. 

Section  II.  Here. 

The  Here  of  Homer  is  a  deity  of  all  others  the  most 
exclusively  and  intensely  national. 

Being  such,  she  is  modelled  strictly  according  to  that 
anthropomorphic  instinct  which  governed  throughout 
the  formation  of  the  Olympian  system.  She  is  proud, 
passionate,  sensual,  jealous,  vindictive  ;  but  all  these  in 
strict  subordination  to  the  great  end,  which  she  pursues 
with  unremitting  perseverance,  the  glorification  of  the 


i  II.  xxiv.  174. 

3  II.  viii.  47-52 ;  xv.  600 ;  xx.  23. 

4  II.  xiv.  233,  236,  252,  268,  359. 


2  U.  xvi.  459. 


THE  DIVINITIES  OF  OLYMPOS.  237 

Greeks.  She  lias  no  personal  or  moral  preferences, 
like  the  regard  of  Athen&  for  Odysseus,  founded  upon 
qualities  of  character.  Zeus  is  obliged  to  conceal  from 
her  the  concession  which  he  has  made  to  Thetis  on  be- 
half of  her  son,  the  greatest  of  Greek  warriors,  but  to 
the  detriment  of  the  host  at  large.1  She  loves  Achilles 
and  Agamemnon  with  an  equal  love  ; 2  that  is,  she  loves 
them,  not  personally,  but  for  their  cause. 

Her£  is  a  deity  much  superior  to  Poseidon,  as  ex- 
hibiting higher  intelligence,  with  more  capacity  of  far- 
reaching  design,  and  of  the  adaptation  of  means  to  an 
end ;  matters  these,  in  which  we  have  no  manifesta- 
tion of  Poseidon's  faculties,  except  in  his  purely  ob- 
stinate persecution  of  Odysseus,  for  having  used  with 
energy  the  resources  of  self-defence  against  a  monster.3 
Still  there  is  a  total  absence  of  moral  elements  from 
the  character  as  it  is  presented  to  us.  Angered  at  the 
lameness  of  her  child  Hephaistos,  she  desires  to  conceal 
his  birth.4  Zeus  charges  her  with  being  ready  to  eat 
Priam  and  his  children  raw.5  She  borrows  the  kestos 
of  Aphrodite,  and  entices  Zeus  in  a  scene  where  sen- 
suality is  freely  used,  though  as  the  instrument  of  a 
deeply  laid  and  artful  scheme.6  The  motive  assigned 
for  her  hostility  to  Troy,  is  the  insult  she  had  suffered 
by  the  adverse  judgment  of  Paris.7 

In  the  Odyssey,  she  may  be  said  for  practical  pur- 
poses entirely  to  disappear.  She  is  mentioned  but 
seven  times  in  the  whole  poem :  thrice,  quite  incident- 
ally, in  a  formula  where  Zeus  is  called  the  loud-thun- 
dering husband  of  Her£,  and  is  himself  the  true  subject 

i  II.  i.  545-550.  2  II.  i.  196.  3  Od.  i.  20. 

4  II.  xyiii.  396.  5  II.  iv.  34-36.  6  n.  xiv.  190. 

"  II.  xxiv.  27. 


238  JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 

of  the  passage ;  once  as  the  mother  of  Heb£  ;  and 
thrice  in  legend  or  narrative  extraneous  to  the  subject 
of  the  poem.  Nor  is  this  unnatural.  For,  in  the  do- 
mestic part  of  it,  there  is  no  question  of  the  Greek 
nationality :  while  amidst  the  Phoenician  and  Eastern 
associations  of  the  Outer  Geography,  a  conception  so 
strictly  Hellenic  could  have  no  part  to  play. 

Though  the  power  of  Her£  is  immense,  yet  she  is 
not  surrounded  with  that  reverence  which  the  Poet 
always  maintains  towards  Athene*  and  Apollo.  She  is 
not  exempted  from  the  touch  of  defeat  and  dishonor. 

She  was  subjected  to  ignominious  punishment  by 
Zeus,  who  suspended  her  with  her  hands  in  chains,  and 
witli  anvils  hanging  from  her  feet.1  And,  in  the  course 
of  her  long  feud  with  Heracles,  that  hero  wounded  her 
with  a  three-pronged  arrow  in  the  right  breast,  and 
caused  her  to  suffer  intolerable  pain.2 

She  alone  among  the  deities  is  called  Argeian  Her£, 
as  Helen  is  called  Argeian  Helen,  In  both  instances, 
the  epithet  appears  to  be  founded  on  the  special  rela- 
tion between  the  person  to  whom  it  is  applied,  and 
the  head-quarter  of  Greek  power,  especially  as  that 
power  was  associated  with  the  Argeian  name,  and 
therefore  probably  with  the  period  of  the  Perseids.  This 
connection  subsisted  in  Argolis  throughout  the  his- 
toric period.  In  the  Iliad,  Her£  is  said  to  regard  the 
Greeks  as  her  children.3.  She  collected  the  armament 
against  Troy.4  She  carried  Agamemnon  safely  back 
to  Greece.5  She  conducted  Jason  and  the  Argo 
through  the  terrible  rocks,6  the  Planctai,  afterwards 
Sumplegades.    She  hates  Heracles,  apparently  because 

i  II.  xv.  18-21.  2  ii.  v.  392.  3  II.  xviii.  858. 

4  II.  iv.  24-29.  5  Od.  iv.  513.  6  Od.  xii.  72. 


THE  DIVINITIES  OF  OLYMPOS. 


239 


he  is  in  antagonism  to  the  Perseid  dynasty.1  It  can 
hardly  be  from  conjugal  jealousy,  since  Jupiter  recounts 
his  conquests  in  addressing  her  on  mount  Ida.  In  a 
word,  the  vigor  and  activity  of  her  partisanship  are 
such,  as  to  make  the  more  dignified  conduct  of  Athene* 
seem  almost  tame  by  comparison. 

Her  rank  in  Olympos  is  among  the  highest:  she 
must  be  supposed  to  sit  by  Zeus  on  one  side,  as  we 
are  told  Athene  did  on  the  other.2  The  gods  rise 
from  their  seats  to  her  as  well  as  to  Zeus,  when  she 
comes  among  them.3  At  times,  she  acts  immediately 
on  the  thoughts  of  man  ;  as  when  she  prompts  Achilles 
to  call  the  Assembly  of  the  First  Book,  in  order  to 
stay  the  plague ; 4  or  impels  Agamemnon  to  stay  the 
victorious  course  of  Hector.5  At  other  times,  Athene^ 
is  content  to  be  her  agent ;  as  when,  in  the  debate  with 
Agamemnon,  she  stays  the  wrath  of  Achilles.6  But  by 
way  of  counterpoise,  when  the  two  goddesses  are  about 
to  descend  together  from  heaven,  it  is  Herd  who  har- 
nesses the  chariot,  and  plays  in  it  the  inferior  part  of 
driver,  while  Athen£  bears  the  Aigis.7  The  promise 
of  her  aid  against  Poseidon  greatly  relieves  the  mind 
of  Zeus.8 

She  assumes,  like  the  other  higher  deities,  the  human 
form ; 9  and  exhibits  an  extraordinary  power  over  na- 
ture, as  if  entitled,  in  virtue  of  her  wifehood,  to  exer- 
cise in  a  manner  the  attributes  of  Zeus.  Iris  is  her 
messenger  as  well  as  his.10    Not  only  does  she  order 

i  II.  xix.  130-133.  2  ii.  xxiv.  ioo.  3  n.  xv.  85. 

4  II.  i.  55.  5  II.  viii.  218. 

6  II.  i.  194-196  :  cf.  ii.  156 ;  v.  711 ;  viii.  331.        7  II.  v.  745-748. 

8  II.  xv.  49-52.  9  H.  v.  784-792.  i«  II.  xviii.  168. 


240 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


the  Winds,1  but  she  sends  the  sun,2  in  spite  of  his 
reluctance,  to  his  setting.  When,  indignant  at  the 
boast  of  Hector,  she  rocks  upon  her  throne,3  Olympos 
shakes  beneath  her,  as  it  did  under  the  nod  of  Zeus. 
She  endows  the  horses  of  Achilles  with  a  voice.4  And, 
conjointly  with  Athene^,  she  thunders  in  honor  of  the 
crowning  of  Agamemnon.5 

We  learn  from  a  speech  of  Phoenix,  that,  together 
with  Athene,  she  can  confer  valor.  The  daughters  of 
Pandareus  she  endows  both  with  beauty  and  with 
sense,  while  Athene  and  Aphrodite  provide  them  with 
industrial  skill  and  bodily  food  respectively,  and  Arte- 
mis bestows  upon  them  stature.6 

Here  takes  part,  with  Athen£  and  Poseidon,  in  the 
great  rebellion  against  Zeus,  which  all  but  effected  his 
deposition.  She  had  also  been  personally  favored  with 
a  special  protection,  at  the  time  when  Zeus  himself 
deposed  his  father  Kronos,  and  thrust  him  into  the 
Underworld. 

Of  these  two  myths,  the  latter  seems  to  suggest  its 
own  interpretation.  Its  scene  is  fixed  in  the  midst  of 
the  great  Theogonic  crisis,  at  the  point  of  the  transi- 
tion from  the  Pelasgian  to  the  Hellenic  or  Olympian 
system.  That  was  a  moment  of  danger  to  her,  but  we 
read  of  no  such  danger  to  Poseidon.  From  this  we 
may  naturally  infer  that  Poseidon  had  no  concern  at 
all  with  the  Pelasgian  system,  and  was  an  importation 
from  a  source  altogether  distinct.  Her£,  however,  had 
a  counterpart  below,  with  which  she  might  readily 
have  been  confounded.   In  that  superseded  system  we 

1  This  seems  the  natural  construction  of  Od.  iv.  513,  and  xii.  69-72. 

2  II.  xviii.  239.  3  II.  viii.  199.  4  II.  xix.  407. 
5  II.  xi.  45.                    6  Od.  xx.  68-72. 


THE  DIVINITIES  OF  OLYMPOS. 


241 


find  a  rata,  or  Earth,  who,  with  other  Nature-Powers, 
inhabits,  and  is  invoked  in,  the  Underworld.  Rescued 
from  that  danger,  and  set  high  in  Olympos,  she  stands 
in  marked  opposition,  as  an  Hellenic  goddess,  to  the 
older  and  coarser  conception  of  the  same  idea,  with 
which  she  is  in  direct  competition.  This  will  account 
for  the  attitude  she  holds  in  the  Poems.  For  here  she 
is  not  only  Hellenic,  but  she  is  nothing  else  ;  and  the 
principle  and  groundwork  of  her  Hellenism  seem  to  be 
an  intense  untiring  hatred  of  what  is  Pelasgian  by  race 
and  association,  just  as  if  she  were  the  preferred  rival 
of  an  old  Pelasgian  deity ;  as  if  she  had  the  very  root 
of  her  being  in  a  strong  recoil  from  the  superseded 
Nature-Power,  into  which  she  might  relapse,  if  Hel- 
lenism were  ever  swallowed  up  by  a  victorious  return 
of  the  Pelasgian  worship.  Born  of  the  Hellenic  reac- 
tion, its  life  and  hers  were  bound  up  together. 

Hence  too,  in  all  likelihood,  we  are  to  account  for 
her  place  in  the  legend  of  the  War  in  heaven.  Zeus, 
like  Janus,  has  two  faces.  When  he  deposes  Kronos, 
he  shows  us  his  Hellenic,  or  Hellic,  face.  But  this 
rebellion  is  a  rebellion  of  deities,  all  of  them  having 
the  most  marked  Hellenic  sympathies,  which  evidently 
run  against  him  in  this  legend,  as  the  head  of  the  old 
Pelasgian  order. 

The  functional  attribute,  specially  entrusted  to  Here 
in  her  Olympian  character,  appears  to  be  only  that  of 
regulating  birth,  through  the  medium  of  the  Eilithuiai. 
This  appears  to  be  an  ascription  derived  from  the 
original  character  of  the  all-producing  earth.  And 
the  anthropomorphic  spirit  of  the  Olympian  religion 
is  well  illustrated  by  the  fact  that  Homer  cuts  her  off 
from  all  other  production,  both  animal  and  vegetable, 

16 


242 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


but  leaves  to  her  only  the  bringing  of  man  to  birth. 
Human  birth  bears  to  Here  the  same  relation  as  birth 
generally  to  Gaia. 

Though  the  Eilithuiai  are  mentioned  as  under  the 
control  of  Here,  they  were  objects  of  worship  ;  for  the 
pseud-Odysseus  mentions  the  case  of  Eilithuie  at  Am- 
nisos  in  Crete.1 

On  the  whole,  then,  it  seems  likely  that  Here,  with 
a  name  representing  "Ega,  or  the  earth,  is  treated  by 
Homer  with  a  transformation  suited  to  the  anthropo- 
morphic and  personifying  spirit  of  the  Olympian  re- 
ligion ;  divorced,  as  to  her  personality,  from  Gaia, 
much  as  Poseidon  is  held  apart  from  Nereus,  and 
standing  towards  Gaia  as  soul  to  body:  the  body 
taking  its  place  with  the  old  elemental  deities  of  the 
Pelasgians  in  the  Underworld,  the  soul  rising  to  higher 
offices.  Here,  thus  detached  from  gross  matter,  carries 
off  with  her,  as  to  man  alone,  the  great  prerogative  of 
earth,  that  she  is  the  all-feeding  and  all-bearing :  the 
rQci(p£Q?j,  the  TtolvcpoQpog,  the  cpegsg^iog.  Accordingly, 
Here  becomes,  or  remains  rather  than  becomes,  the 
great  mother.  She  is  the  wife  of  Zeus,  father  of  gods 
and  men,  and  she  holds  among  his  wives  and  concu- 
bines the  queenly  prerogative,  like  Hecuba  in  Troy; 
the  mother  in  heaven  of  some  of  his  children,  as  Hebe, 
Ares,  and  Hephaistos  ;  and,  with  the  Eilithuiai  for  her 
ministers,  the  goddess  of  all  motherhood  on  earth.2 

ThisJast,  indeed,  is  her  only  specialty.  Those  other 
and  high  prerogatives,  which  invest  her  with  command 
over  Nature,  and  with  the  power  of  direct  action  on 
the  mind,  probably  accrue  to  her  as  the  consort  of 


i  Od.  xix.  188. 


2  II.  xix.  119. 


THE  DIVINITIES  OF  OLYMPOS. 


243 


Zeus,  and  are  therefore  not  her  original  gifts,  but  the 
reflection  of  his  glory. 

We  have,  perhaps,  in  the  Theomachy,  at  least  one 
vestige  of  the  prerogative  of  Here  as  a  Nature-Power. 
It  is  she  who  excites  Hephaistos  against  the  river 
Xanthos  ; 1  and  again,  the  River,  parched  by  fire,  makes 
his  appeal  to  her  to  relieve  him  from  suffering,  with 
an  engagement  which,  he  takes  to  aid  Troy  no  more, 
not  even  in  its  last  necessity.  Here  accedes  to  his 
prayer,  and  checks  the  action  of  Hephaistos,  who 
thereupon  desists.2  It  seems  as  if  the  ground  for 
choosing  Here  to  interpose  on  this  occasion  lay  in  the 
relation  between  rivers  and  the  Earth  along  which 
they  trace  their  course.  This  is  the  only  act  of  a  defi- 
nite nature,  with  a  sensible  result,  performed  by  Here 
within  the  limits  of  Troas,  a  fact  which  is  again  in 
accordance  with  the  construction  I  have  given  it,  and 
the  apparent  bias  of  the  Troic  religion  towards  Nature- 
worship. 

Section  III.  Poseidon. 

The  most  striking  feature  of  the  Homeric  Poseidon, 
or  rather  Poseidaon,  is  vast  force  combined  with  a  total 
absence  of  the  higher  elements  of  deity,  whether  intel- 
lectual or.moral.  A  persistent  vindictiveness,  indeed, 
we  trace  as  the  groundwork  of  his  entire  action  in 
both  the  Poems :  he  hates  the  Trojans,  for  the  offence 
of  Laomedon  ;  he  hates  Odysseus,  because,  in  the 
strictest  self-defence,  he  had  blinded  Poluphemos.  By 
no  worthy  word  or  act  is  he  marked  in  any  part  either 


1  II.  xxi.  328-330. 


2  lb.  367-381. 


244 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


of  Iliad  or  Odyssey,  unless  it  be  by  some  natural  affec- 
tion for  his  descendants,  whether  they  be  the  youthful 
warriors  of  the  house  of  Actor,1  or  the  savage,  cruel, 
atheistic  Cyclop. 

One  of  the  three  sons  of  Kronos  and  Rhea,  he  comes 
next  to  Zeus  in  order  of  birth.2  He  claims  an  equal- 
ity 3  of  rank  ;  and  avers,  that  the  distribution  of  sov- 
ereignties among  the  three  brothers  was  made  only  by 
lot.  More  than  indirectly,  he  asserts  equality,  as  well 
as  independence.  When  admonished  by  Iris  that  he 
is  junior  to  Zeus,  he  acknowledges  that  there  is  force 
in  the  plea,  and  he  withdraws  from  the  plain  of  battle 
as  he  had  been  bid  ;  but  he  reserves  a  right  of  resent- 
ment, in  case  Zeus  shall  not  fulfil  the  decree  against 
Troy.  Zeus  on  his  part  is  delighted  at  the  news  ;  and 
observes,  that  it  would  have  cost  much  labor  to  coerce 
him.4  Again,  it  is  plain  that,  in  the  conspiracies 
against  Zeus,  he  was  the  acting  partner.  For  it  is  the 
superiority  of  his  son  to  him,  that  frustrates  the  design 
of  the  whole  party  ; 5  and  when  Here  attempts  to  revive 
the  scheme,  he  pleads  in  reply,  not  their  collective  in- 
feriority, but  his  own  singly,6  as  if  he  thought  that  it 
was,  in  point  of  mere  force,  well-nigh  all  they  would 
have  to  rely  on. 

Apollo  is  restrained,  in  the  Theomachy,  by  a  senti- 
ment of  respect,  from  coming  to  blows  with  Poseidon, 
as  his  paternal  uncle.7  And  a  sentiment  precisely 
similar  prevents  Athene  in  the  Odyssey  from  comfort- 
ing Odysseus  by  her  visible  presence,  even  at  her  own 
sanctuary  in  Scherie.8 

i  II.  xi.  749-751.  2  u.  xiv.  174-217.  3  rb.  186-209. 

4  II.  xiy.  220-235.  5  ii.  i.  404.  6  ft.  ym  211.  . 

7  II.  xxi.  468.  8  Qd.  vi.  329 ;  xiii.  341. 


THE  DIVINITIES  OF  OLYMPOS. 


245 


Though  god  of  the  sea,  he  is  not,  so  to  speak,  the 
Sea-god,  or  the  Water-god.  He  has  in  him  nothing  of 
an  elemental  deity.  He  is  not  placed  in  as  near  a 
relation  to  water  as  Zeus  is  to  air,  by  the  epithet 
JukstTjg,  and  the  phrase  Ahg  o^gog.1  These  very  phrases 
show  us  that  he  was  not,  in  Homer's  view,  the  god  of 
moisture,  or  even  of  water,  generally.  The  attempts 
to  derive  his  name  from  a  common  root  with  noaig, 
c  drink,'  or  TtorafAog,  6  a  river,'  would  therefore  be  insuffi- 
cient or  inappropriate,  even  if  they  were  not,  as  they 
are,  somewhat  equivocal.  It  is  remarkable  that,  while 
Poseidon  supplied  a  sea-deluge  as  his  contribution 
towards  effacing  the  Greek  trench,  it  was  Apollo  who 
turned  upon  it  the  mouths  of  all  the  rivers  that  de- 
scend from  Ida;2  which,  when  Poseidon  had  accom- 
plished his  labor,  he  in  turn  sent  back  again  to  their 
proper  channels. 

Nereus,  the  true  Sea-god  of  Homer,  gave  to  the 
element  of  water  that  name  of  nero,  in  the  popular 
speech  of  the  Greeks,  which  it  still  retains.3  He  ever 
dwells  in  the  depths  of  the  sea,  as  if  he  belonged  to 
them,  and  as  if  they  supplied  his  atmosphere.  But 
Poseidon  has  a  palace  there  near  Aigai,  where  his 
chariot  was  kept,  where  the  Poet  seems  to  imply  that 
he  resided.4  Yet  not  exclusively  ;  for  he  appears  at 
the  Olympian  Court,  on  the  plain  of  Troy,  on  the 
hill-tops  of  Samothrace,5  or  on  the  Solyman 6  moun- 
tains ;  and  he  singly  visits  the  Ethiopians,  to  partake 

1  Aiinerrig  —  fallen  from  Zeus.    Acbg  ofifipog  =  Zeus-rain. 

2  II.  xii.  17-35. 

3  Compare  the  adj.  neros,  wet,  in  the  late  Greek  of  Phryniclms,  the 
grammarian,  a.d.  180. 

*  II.  xiii.  15-22 ;  xv.  219.    Od.  v.  381. 

5  II.  xiii.  11.  6  Od.  v.  283. 


246 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


of  the  sacrifices  they  offered  him.1  This  reference  to 
his  being  worshipped  in  a  distant  quarter  is  the  second 
sign  we  have  seen  of  his  foreign  origin  ;  the  first  was 
the  want  of  definiteness  in  his  position  of  inferiority 
relatively  to  Zeus,  as  though  he  had  been,  elsewhere, 
without  a  superior. 

So  again  there  appears  to  be  in  the  Outer  or  Phoe- 
nician system  an  elemental  sea-god,  Phorcus,  who  is 
called  ruler  of  the  sea,  and  after  whom  a  harbor  in 
Ithaca  is  named.2 

Prayer  appears  only  to  be  addressed  to  him  within 
the  Greek  world,  in  the  neighborhood  of  the  sea,  as  by 
the  Envoys  in  the  Ninth  Iliad  ; 3  and  by  his  own  de- 
scendants, as  Nestor  in  the  Third  Odyssey,  who  like- 
wise worships  by  the  shore.4  He  can  assume  the  form 
of  any  man  ;  can  blunt  the  point  of  a  spear ;  can  carry 
off  his  friends,  or  envelop  his  opponents  in  vapor.5 
He  can  inspire  vigor  into  heroes  ;  not  immediately, 
however,  but  by  a  stroke  of  his .  staff.6  Direct  action 
on  the  mind  appears  to  be  beyond  his  range.  The 
storms  of  the  Poems,  in  the  Greek  or  inner  world,  are 
not  raised  by  Poseidon.  Probably  he  had  not  the  power 
to  raise  a  storm,  though  he  can  break,  as  the  sea  does, 
fragments  from  the  rocks  of  the  coast.7  Storms  seem 
to  have  been  regarded  as  belonging  to  the  province  of 
the  air-god.  They  are  imputed  to  him  in  a  passage  of 
the  Twenty-fourth  Odyssey  ; 8  but  it  would  not  be  alto- 
gether safe,  perhaps,  to  rely  on  that  Book,  in  a  case 
where  it  seems  to  vary  from  the  usual  order  of  the 
Poems. 

l  Od.  i.  22,  25.  2  Od.  i.  72 ;  xiii.  96.  3  II.  ix.  183. 

4  Od.  iii.  5.    Cf.  II.  xi.  728. 

5  II.  xiii.  43,  215 ;  xiv.  135  ;  xiii.  562 ;  xi.  752 ;  xx.  321-329. 

6  II.  xiii.  59.  7  Od.  iv.  506.  8  Od.  xxiv.  110. 


THE  DIVINITIES  OF  OLYMPOS. 


247 


If,  however,  Poseidon  was  less  than  the  absolute  lord 
of  water,  he  was  also  more. 

1.  His  possession  of  the  Trident  (triaina)  could 
hardly  be  due  to  a  purely  maritime  sovereignty. 

2.  His  relation  to  the  horse,  which  is  very  per- 
ceptible, though  not  of  primary  rank,  in  Homer,1 
and  which  became  almost  paramount  in  the  later  age, 
cannot  be  adequately  explained  by  any  comparison 
between  that  animal  and  the  ship,  or  the  wave. 

3.  Poseidon  is  the  building-god. 

4.  Poseidon  stands  in  close  relation  to  the  giants 
and  other  rebellious  personages,  who  troubled  both  gods 
and  men. 

The  existence  of  these  associations  for  Poseidon,  inas- 
much as  they  cannot  be  explained  by  virtue  of  his  place 
in  the  Olympian  system,  again  urges  us  to  look  for  the 
signs  of  his  origin  abroad.  The  key  to  the  inquiry  is 
to  be  found  in  the  Outer  world  of  the  Odyssey.  For 

1.  It  is  plain  that  the  materials  of  the  narrative,  so 
far  as  the  scene  of  the  poem  is  laid  in  that  Outer  world, 
must  have  been  derived  by  the  Poet  from  the  Phoeni- 
cians, who  alone  frequented  the  waters  beyond  the 
iEgean  and  the  Greek  coasts. 

2.  In  the  western  portion  of  the  Outer  sphere,  Zeus 
practically  disappears  from  the  governing  office,  and 
Poseidon  becomes  the  supreme  ruler. 

We  have  seen  that  the  subordination  of  Poseidon  to 
Zeus  rested  on  juniority.  If  Zeus  were  the  chief  god 
of  the  Pelasgian  worship,  and  Poseidon  came  in  with 
the  Phoenicians,  this  poetical  arrangement  is  suitably 
explained ;  and  it  exhibits  a  skilful  adaptation  to  the 


i  II.  xxiii.  277,  306,  584. 


248 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


conditions  under  which  the  Olympian  system  was  con- 
structed. His  rebellion  against  Zeus,  in  concert  with 
Here  and  Athene,  appears  to  show  that,  as  new  immi- 
grants arrived  in  Greece,  bearing  with  them  their  own 
religion,  the  older  system  was  for  a  time  brought  into 
question  and  endangered  as  a  whole.  The  delivery  of 
Zeus  from  this  rebellion  will  be  considered  in  connec- 
tion with  the  goddess  Thetis.1 

The  Greek  legends  relating  to  Poseidon  are  just  such 
as  we  might  expect  with  reference  to  the  god  of  a  nau- 
tical people,  touching  at  many  points  about  the  coast  of 
Greece.  He  contends  with  Helios  for  Corinth,  with 
Athene  for  Troizen  and  Athens,  with  Here  for  Argolis, 
with  Zeus  for  iEgina,  with  Dionusos  for  Naxos.  Even 
in  the  Greece  of  Homer  we  find  spots  specially  conse- 
crated to  him  in  Bceotia,  in  Euboea,  and  in  Aigialos. 

Let  us  now  turn  to  the  Yoyage  of  Odysseus  in  the 
Outer  world;  which  begins  with  the  Lotos-eaters,  and 
ends  with  the  Phaiakes  of  Corfu.  Mure  2  suggests  that 
their  name  is  a  parody  of  the  name  Phoinikes  :  Homer 
paints  them  as  a  wealthy,  unwarlike  people,  singularly 
expert  in  navigation.  This  apparent  incongruity  falls 
in  with  the  case  of  Corfu,  if  it  was  then  inhabited,  as 
it  has  been  in  later  times,  by  a  stationary,  gentle, 
indolent  peasantry,  and  at  the  same  time  held  by  a 
dominant  settlement  or  colony  of  foreigners,  ruling 
it  through  maritime  power.  Mure  cites  Phaik  as  a 
Semitic  word  for  4  magnificent,'  and  Scher,  as  meaning 
4  an  emporium.' 

In  this  Phoenician  or  Outer  world,  Athene,  who  had 
constantly  tended  Odysseus  while  in  Troas,  and  who 


1  Infra,  sect.  xxi. 


2  Lit.  Hist,  of  Greece,  vol.  i.  p.  510. 


THE  DIVINITIES  OF  OLYMPOS. 


249 


resumes  the  regular  charge  of  hiin  in  Ithaca,  systemati- 
cally abstains  from  helping  him  ;  and  wholly  disappears 
until  Poseidon  has,  in  the  Fifth  Odyssey,  voluntarily 
receded  from  the  scene.1  She  declares  that  respect  to 
her  uncle  was  the  motive  for  her  own  disappearance.2 
The  presumption  then  is  that  this  Outer  world  was  a 
sphere  in  some  way  so  specially  his  own,  that  Athene, 
whose  power  and  prerogatives  in  Homer  are  so  ex- 
tremely lofty,  was  unwilling  to  offer  him  any  opposi- 
tion there. 

Accordingly,  we  have  direct  evidence  that,  in  relation 
to  the  Outer  world,  Poseidon  exercised  prerogatives 
which  seem  not  to  have  belonged  to  him  within  the 
Greek  sphere.  He  raised  the  storm  which  wrecked 
the  raft  of  Odysseus  ;  gathering  the  clouds,  which  was 
the  special  function  of  Zeus,  and  causing  the  winds  to 
blow.3 

Moreover,  in  the  lay  of  Ares  and  Aphrodite,  it  is  evi- 
dently Poseidon  who  presides  in  the  Assembly  of  the 
gods,  and  who  consequently  negotiates  with  Hephais- 
tos  for  the  relief  of  Ares  from  the  net  of  steel.  And 
just  as,  at  the  beginning  of  the  Second  Iliad,  the  other 
gods  were  sleeping,  but  Zeus4  (who  was  responsible) 
slept  not,  so  here,  while  the  other  deities  were  laugh- 
ing, Poseidon  did  not  laugh  ; 5  as  we  may  suppose,  for 
the  same  reason.  And  while,  on  ordinary  occasions, 
we  are  always  told  that  the  gods  assembled  in  the 
XaXxopark  8w  of  Zeus,  here  the  words  4  of  Zeus  '  are 
omitted.6 

Undoubtedly  the  name  of  Zeus  appears  from  time  to 
time  in  those  Books  of  the  Odyssey  which  describe  the 


i  Od.  y.  380. 

4  II.  ii.  1. 


2  Od.  xiii.  341. 
5  Od.  yiii.  344. 


3  Od.  v.  291. 
6  Od.  viii.  321. 


250 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


wanderings  of  Odysseus  ;  but  his  governing  office  dis- 
appears until,  in  the  end  of  the  Twelfth  Book,  he  acts 
at  the  instance  of  Helios  (the  Sun),  and  on  behalf  of 
the  Olympian  Court.  It  is  not  the  abstract,  but  the 
working  supremacy  of  Poseidon,  which  the  Poem  seems 
to  show.  At  the  same  time,  the  question  might  be 
raised  whether,  as  in  the  later  and  extraneous  tradi- 
tion the  name  Zeus  was  often  united  with  that  of 
Poseidon  (as  much  as  to  say  4  Zeus  the  supreme  deity, 
in  the  form  and  under  the  name  of  Poseidon'),  so 
here  the  word  may  not  improbably  have  the  general 
force  of  6  god,'  rather  than  the  personal  meaning  of  a 
particular  god.  Even  in  Homer,  A'fdoneus  is  called  the 
Zeus  of  the  Underworld  ;  and  so  Poseidon  may  be  the 
Zeus  of  the  sea  and  the  sea-regions.  And  it  is  very 
notable  that  in  Od.  v.  303-305,  Odysseus  ascribes  to 
Zeus  that  very  storm,  which  we  are  expressly  told  that 
Poseidon  had  raised. 

We  have  therefore  very  strong  indications  from  the 
text  of  Homer  that  Poseidon  was  the  god,  or  the  chief- 
god,  of  the  Phoinikes  ;  and  if  he  was,  then,  upon  their 
arrival  in  Greece,  he  could  only  be  incorporated  into 
the  Greek  system  by  some  such  method  as  Homer  has 
adopted,  in  giving  him  at  once  a  parity  and  a  disparity 
with  Zeus. 

Thus  the  Outer  geography  affords  us  the  strongest 
evidence  of  the  Phoenician  origin  of  Poseidon.  It  shows 
us  more  than  this,  as  will  be  seen  when  we  treat  of  the 
position  of  Helios  in  Homer. 

The  view  now  taken  is  in  harmony  with  the  evi- 
dence supplied  from  other  sources  respecting  Poseidon. 
Herodotus,  deriving  the  names  of  the  other  Greek  gods 
from  Egypt,  excepts  Poseidon.    History  shows  abun- 


THE  DIVINITIES  OF  OLYMPOS. 


251 


dantly  the  prevalence  of  Poseidonian  worship  among 
the  Phoenicians  and  their  colonial  progeny.  Diodorus 1 
says  an  altar  to  Poseidon  was  built  at  the  northern 
extremity  of  the  Red  Sea,  where  was  a  promontory 
called  Poseide'ion,  and  a  grove  of  palms  (Phoinikes). 
In  the  war  with  Gelon,  Hamilcar,  general  of  the  Car- 
thaginians, offered  to  Poseidon  a  magnificent  sacrifice, 
with  a  view  to  success  in  what  were  mainly  land  oper- 
ations. Agaiiij  while  sacrificing  a  boy  to  Kronos,  he 
threw  into  the  sea  a  crowd  of  victims  in  honor  of 
Poseidon.2  Later  in  the  historic  period,  when  Scipio 
attacks  Carthago  Nova,  he  assures  his  army  that  he 
has  the  favor  of  Poseidon  made  known  to  him  in  a 
dream  ; 3  that  is  to  say,  that  the  foe  was  deserted  by 
his  own  national  and  proper  god.  Pausanias,  again, 
shows  us  the  worship  of  Poseidon  practised  in  parts  of 
Greece,  whither  it  never  could  have  come  had  he  been 
regarded  as  a  mere  sea-god  ;  and  nowhere  more  than 
in  Arcadia.  Manifestly,  if  he  were  the  chief  and  dis- 
tinctive god  of  the  Phoenician  nationality,  it  is  probable 
that,  as  that  acute  race  penetrated  for  traffic  into 
Greece,  they  would  carry  with  them  their  worship  as 
they  went.  And  again,  in  many  of  the  local  legends 
related  by  that  author,  which  afford  evidence  of  a  very 
trustworthy  kind,  we  find  Poseidon  possessed  of  at- 
tributes which,  in  the  established  religion  of  Hellas, 
belonged  properly  to  Zeus.4 

Let  us  now  endeavor  to  examine  the  special  and 
separate  attributes  of  Poseidon,  already  enumerated, 
in  the  light  of  his  Phoenician  associations. 

i  Diod.  Sic.  iii.  41.  2  ib.  xi.  21 ;  xiii.  86. 

3  Polyb.  Bk.  x.  11.  7;  14.  12. 

4  See  'Phoenicia  and  Greece/  in  the  Quarterly  Eeview  of 
Jan.  1868. 


252 


JUVENTUS  MUNDT. 


With  respect  to  the  Trident,  an  instrument  so  un- 
suited  to  water,  it  appears  evidently  to  point  to  some 
tradition  of  a  Trinity,  such  as  may  still  be  found  in 
various  forms  of  Eastern  religion,  other  than  the  He- 
brew. It  may  have  proceeded,  among  the  Phoenicians, 
from  the  common  source  of  an  older  tradition  ;  and  this 
seems  more  probable  than  its  direct  derivation  from 
the  Hebrews,  with  whom,  however,  we  know  that  the 
Phoenicians  had  intercourse. 

Though  the  relation  of  Poseidon  to  the  horse  is  not 
explained  by  his  connection  with  Phoenicia,  yet,  as  this 
connection  points  to  his  supremacy,  and  thus  gives  him 
wider  associations  than  those  of  a  merely  maritime 
deity,  it  opens  a  field  from  which  the  true  explanation 
may  yet  be  gathered.  I  have  suggested  elsewhere  a 
solution  of  the  problem.1 

Reference  to  what  has  been  already  said  of  the 
Phoinikes  will  show  that  the  relation  of  Poseidon  to 
them  at  once  explains  his  character  as  the  building- 
god. 

Lastly,  with  regard  to  the  giants  and  monsters.  The 
facts  are  as  follows. 

The  Cyclops,  a  godless  race,  are  his  children.2  The 
impious  giants  are  declared  to  be  of  the  kindred  of 
the  gods  : 3  this  is  probably  through  Poseidon.  By  the 
daughter  of  their  king  and  arch-tempter  Eurumedon, 
he  was  the  father  of  the  royal  house  of  Scherie\4 
These  giants  the  wicked  and  cruel  Laistrugones  are 
said  to  resemble.5  By  Iphimedeia,  he  was  the  father 
of  Otos  and  Ephialtes,  those  monster-youths 6  who 


1  Supra,  Phoenicians,  Chap.  V. 
3  Od.  vii.  205,  206. 
5  Od.  x.  120. 


2  Od.  ix.  275,  412. 
4  Od.  vii.  56-60. 
6  Od.  xi.  305-320. 


THE  DIVINITIES  OF  OLYMPOS. 


253 


heaped  up  the  mountains,  and  perished  by  the  hands 
of  Apollo.  He  was  also  the  father  of  Briareus  (called 
likewise  Aigaion),  who,  however,  took  part  against 
him.1 

The  effort  of  the  two  youths  recalls  the  traditions  of 
the  Tower  of  Babel,  and  of  the  War  in  Heaven. 

Two  considerations  may  be  noticed,  which  tend 
to  account  for  the  place  of  Poseidon  as  the  Phoeni- 
cian god,  in  relation  to  many  rebellious  and  unruly 
spirits. 

First,  the  rough  manners  of  a  sea-faring  and  bucca- 
neering people.  Down  to  the  time  of  Cicero  and  of 
the  Roman  Empire,  a  rude  and  ruffian-like  character 
was  called  Neptuni  filius. 

Secondly,  and  in  possible  connection  with  what  has 
just  been  said,  Syria  was  inhabited  by  Canaanites  ;  and 
it  has  been  observed  that  the  names  given  in  Scripture 
to  that  race  indicate  great  stature  and  physical  force, 
which  became  the  basis  of  a  tradition  that  they  were  a 
race  of  giants.2  To  the  Greek  mind  this  would  very 
naturally  convey  that  they  were  children  of  Poseidon 
as  the  Phoenician  god.  In  a  word,  the  Phoenician 
origin  of  Poseidon,  and  that  only,  appears  to  supply 
a  key  to  his  position  and  attributes,  such  as  they  are 
shown  in  the  Olympian  system. 

Section  IY.  Aidoneus. 

The  figure  of  Aidoneus,  or  Aides,  is  one  of  the  most 
obscure  in  the  whole  Homeric  mythology.  Yet  here 
too  there  is,  as  I  think,  a  reward  for  patient  observa- 
tion ;  and  a  clue  is  to  be  found  which  may  enable  us 


i  II.  i.  401-406. 


2  Le  Normant,  vol.  ii.  p.  244. 


254 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


to  trace  him  home  to  his  origin,  as  a  Nature-Power  of 
an  older  theogony,  rather  than  what  he  might  at  first 
sight  appear  to  be,  little  more  than  a  shadowy  creature 
of  the  Poet's  imagination. 

The  particulars  respecting  him  in  the  Poems  are 
but  few. 

He  was  one  of  the  deities  who  suffered  at  the  hand 
of  man :  namely,  of  Heracles.1  Now  the  associations 
of  Heracles  in  Homer  are  Hellenic,  as  we  may  per- 
ceive from  the  co-operation  of  Athene  with  him  ;  and 
therefore  this  legend,  so  far  as  it  goes,  tends  to  place 
A'idoneus  beyond  the  line  of  pure  Hellenic  tradition. 
It  is  true,  that  Heracles  also  assaulted  Here :  but  the 
enmity  between  them  was  special,  and  founded  on  the 
jealousy  of  the  goddess  in  favor  of  the  ruling  house 
of  the  Perseids. 

Heracles  shot  this  god  in  the  shoulder  with  an  arrow 
at  Pulos,  not  of  Messenia  but  of  Elis,  according  to 
Pausanias ; 2  and  laid  him  prostrate  among  the  dead, 
huge  as  he  was.  He  rose,  went  to  Olympos,  and  was 
cured  by  Paieon.3 

Though  a  deity  of  the  Underworld,4  he  is  the  brother 
of  Zeus,  having  shared  in  the  partition  of  the  universe 
by  lot.  He  is  therefore  adopted,  like  Poseidon,  into 
the  Olympian  Court,  and  becomes  entitled  to  appear  in 
the  Hellenic  heaven,  though  supposed  usually  to  abide 
in  the  Shades. 

His  action  in  the  Poems  is  singularly  faint ;  an 
arrangement  of  which  we  shall  see  the  probable  reason. 
During  the  battle  of  the  gods,  he  trembles5  lest  the 
earth-shaker  Poseidon  should  split  the  ground,  and  ex- 

1  II.  v.  395.  2  Vi.  25.  3.  3  n.  v>  398-402. 

4  II.  xv.  187,  191.        &  n  xx.  ex. 


THE  DIVINITIES  OF  OLYMPOS. 


255 


liibit  the  nether  region,  where  he  is  lord  (anax),  through 
the  chasm.  This  shuddering  may  be  said  to  be  the 
single  action  ascribed  to  him  in  the  Poems. 

We  have,  however,  passages  illustrative  of  his  char- 
acter and  functions.  Stern  and  inexorable,  he  is  to 
men  the  most  hateful  of  all  the  gods.1  This  declara- 
tion is  curiously  illustrated  by  the  after  history  of  the 
Olympian  system.  In  all  Greece,  says  Pausanias,2 
there  is  no  single  temple  of  Aides,  except  at  a  single 
spot  of  Elis,  where,  according  to  tradition,  he  fought  on 
the  side  of  the  Pulians  against  Heracles.  And  this 
temple  was  opened  once  a  year : 2  6 1  suppose,'  adds 
Pausanias,  '  because  men  die  but  once.'  This  perhaps 
would  have  been  a  more  apt  reason  if  men  had  died 
once  a  year. 

He  is  also  called  the  strong,3  the  hateful  or  loath- 
some (arvyegog')^  the  gate-closer,5  and  in  a  recurring 
formula,  the  horse-famous  QtlvzoTtmlog')  .e 

Though  he  is  the  king  of  the  world  below,  he  seems 
to  exercise  no  active  power  there  :  throughout  the  Elev- 
enth Odyssey,  the  duties  of  government  are  in  the 
hands  of  Persephone,  who  also  has,  by  the  shores  of 
Okeanos,  the  grove  of  worship.  Odysseus,  indeed, 
offered  to  him  prayer  and  sacrifice,  together  with  her, 
in  the  Underworld : 7  but  there  is  no  sign  of  his  having 
any  established  worship  upon  earth. 

The  helmet  of  Aides  was  used  by  Athene8  to  make 
herself  invisible  to  Ares.  We  hear  of  this  helmet  in 
Hesiod,  as  worn  by  Perseus.9  It  appears  to  be  a  symbol 
of  darkness. 

1  II.  ix.  158.  2  Paus.  as  already  cited. 

3  Od.  x.  534 ;  xi.  47,  277.  4  H.  viii.  368. 

5  II.  viii.  367.  6  II.  v.  654;  xi.  445;  xvi.  625. 

1  Od.  xi.  44-47.  8  II.  v.  845.  9  Scut.  Here.  227. 


256 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


Twice,  however,  this  deity  comes  before  us  in  the 
legend  of  Phoenix.  In  the  war  of  Caludon,  Althaia, 
invoking  woes  on  Meleagros,  beats  the  earth  with  her 
hands,  as  she  calls  on  Aides  and  Persephone" ;  and  she 
is  heard  and  answered  from  beneath  by  the  Erinus.1 
In  the  other  passage  the  process  is  reversed.  The 
father  of  Phoenix  calls  upon  the  Erinus,  and  '  the  gods ' 
fulfil  his  imprecation,  6  and  Zeus  of  the  Underworld, 
and  Persephone  the  awful ; ' 2  perhaps  meaning  this, 
that  these  are  the  gods  to  whom  he  refers. 

Of  this  dualism  m  the  exercise  of  the  penal  office  I 
shall  -speak  elsewhere.  But  the  name  here  given  to 
Aides  is  very  remarkable  :  he  is  the  Zeus  of  the  Under- 
world. How  comes  he  by  this  title  ?  At  first  sight  it 
indicates  some  very  close  relation  between  him  and 
the  traditions  of  Zeus  in  some  one  of  their  forms ;  for 
Poseidon  is  never  called  the  Zeus  of  the  sea,  although, 
as  we  have  seen,  he  carries  strong  marks  of  supremacy 
in  the  Outer  world. 

The  part  he  takes  at  Pulos  seems  to  mean  that  he 
was  the  old  god  of  the  country,  and  the  patron  of  the 
inhabitants  in  their  struggles  against  the  invading 
Heracles.  The  epithet  6  huge '  further  tends  to  asso- 
ciate him  with  the  old  Nature-Powers.  The  con- 
tinuance of  his  worship  at  Pulos  in  the  historic  period, 
when  it  had  disappeared  in  all  other  places,  is  probably 
to  be  taken  as  an  indication,  that  Elis  was  even  in  the 
earliest  times  a  religious  centre  for  Greece,  and  that 
Pulos  was  the  head-quarters  of  the  system,  so  far  as 
Aidoneus  was  concerned. 

We  shall  see  that,  in  the  worship  of  Dodona,  there 


i  II.  ix.  563-572. 


2  id.  453-457. 


THE  DIVINITIES  OF  OLYMPOS. 


25T 


was  a  Dione,  associated  as  queen  with  the  Pelasgian 
Zeus.  This  Dione,  to  make  room  for  Here,  disap- 
pears from  active  relations  to  mankind,  and  becomes  a 
sort  of  lay-figure  in  Olympos. 

Was  there,  then,  a  residuum  of  the  tradition  of  the 
Pelasgian  Zeus,  after  the  Olympian  Zeus  had  been  fully 
conceived  and  established  ?  And,  as  Gaia,  or  Demeter, 
or  both,  represent  such  a  residuum  in  the  case  of  Here, 
does  Aidoneus  represent  it  in  the  case  of  Zeus  ? 1 

This  would  be  an  adjustment  in  full  analogy  with 
Homer's  general  method.  And  it  would  at  once  ac- 
count for  the  extremely  faint  outline  which  he  has 
given  to  the  figure  of  his  Aidoneus,  and  for  his  giving 
the  executive  office  in  the  Underworld  to  Persephone. 
As  he  keeps  back  Demeter,  that  she  may  not  compete 
with  Here,  so  he  would  keep  back  Aidoneus,  that  he 
might  not  compete  with  Zeus. 

Plutarch2  has  preserved  a  tradition,  which  seems  to 
supply  a  missing  link,  respecting  an  Aidoneus,  who  was 
king  of  the  Molossians  ;  and  he  thus  connects  the  name 
with  the  neighborhood  of  Dodona.  This  Aidoneus 
releases  Theseus,  his  prisoner,  at  the  request  of  Hera- 
cles: a  transaction  afterwards  transferred  to  the  nether 
world.  Thus  one  great  Hellic  personage  obtains  from 
him  the  release  of  another,  which  accords  with  the  idea 
of  his  priority  in  time. 

Althaias's  beating  the  earth  would  lead  to  the  conclu- 
sion, that  Aidoneus  must  have  sprung  from  some  tra- 
dition of  an  earth-god,  and  not  an  air-god.  Hesiod, 
the  Pelasgian  poet,  directs  the  husbandman  to  pray  to 


1  Kreuzer,  Symbolik,  iv.  477. 

17 


2  Thes.  c.  35. 


258 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


him,  as  well  as  to  Demeter,  to  prosper  the  fruits  of  the 
earth.1 

It  is,  I  suppose,  possible  that  at  some  period  the 
rude  religion  of  the  Pelasgians,  not  yet  having  ar- 
rived at  the  Egyptian  idea  of  Air  and  Earth,  as  repre- 
senting respectively  the  active  and  the  passive  prin- 
ciple, may  have  conceived  of  Earth  as  its  own  supreme 
deity.  At  any  rate  the  relation  of  Aidoneus  to  the 
Zeus  of  Dodona  appears  to  rest  on  probable  evidence. 

And  if  so,  then  the  argument  for  considering  A'ido- 
neus  as  an  earth-Zeus,  rather  than  as  an  air-Zeus,  is 
certainly  recommended  by  various  probable  suggestions. 
The  general  appearance  of  the  aggregate  phenomena  of 
Nature  or  Element  worship  in  Homer,  and  also  in 
Hesiod,  is  by  no  means  such  as  to  fall  into  a  single 
consistent  whole,  and  appears  to  imply  that  more  than 
one  theogony,  or  scheme  of  deity  and  religion,  had  pre- 
ceded the  Olympian  system.  It  is  almost  certain,  that 
a  plurality  of  such  schemes  must  have  presented  dis- 
crepancies one  with  another. 

Moreover,  when  we  regard  Zeus  as  an  air-god,  he 
stands  in  the  relation  of  the  active  Nature-Power  to 
Earth  as  the  female  and  passive  one.  Now  this  was 
the  notion  embodied  in  the  Egyptian  system,  which 
may  have  been  carried,  in  accordance  with  the  report 
of  Herodotus,  and  either  directly  or  mediately,  from 
Egypt  to  Dodona.  But  it  is  an  idea  implying  a  certain 
refinement,  an  action  of  the  speculative  mind  in  the 
discernment  of  cause  and  effect.  An  entirely  rude 
people  might  perhaps  be  more  likely  to  associate  its 
idea  of  a  God  with  the  earth,  of  which  the  sur- 

1  Opp.  436  ;  Dollinger,  Heid.  und  Jud.  p.  80. 


THE  DIVINITIES  OF  OLYMPOS. 


259 


face  constantly  tells  them  a  tale  of  life,  while  from 
its  bosom  spring  the  stores  that  sustain  their  bodily 
existence. 

Section  V.  Leto. 

I  think  that  every  one  who  carefully  examines  the 
text  of  Homer  with  reference  to  the  picture  there  given 
of  Leto,  must  be  struck  alike  by  the  slightness  and  by 
'the  dignity  of  its  outline ;  and,  I  may  add,  by  the 
absence  (as  far  as  I  know),  of  any  satisfactory  attempt 
to  find  for  her  an  origin  in  any  pre-existing  tradition, 
either  of  the  Pelasgian  Nature-worship,  or  of  the  Assy- 
rian or  Egyptian  systems.  Without  origin,  without 
function,  she  seems  to  be  a  mother,  and  nothing  more 
than  a  mother  ;  yet  she  is  elevated  into  a  commanding 
position  in  the  Homeric  system  by  the  transcendent 
dignity  of  her  son  Apollo. 

The  only  epithets  given  to  Leto  in  the  poems  are  of 
a  character  entirely  general :  glorious,1  right-glorious,2 
lovely-cheeked,3  lovely-haired.4 

Her  action  in  the  poems  is  extremely  circumscribed. 
She  appears  in  the  temple  of  Apollo,  as  his  minister, 
with  her  daughter  Artemis,  to  nurse  and  tend  ^Eneas.5 
She  never  performs  any  governing  office  of  any  kind, 
either  upon  nature  or  upon  man ;  though  she  looks 
with  delight  upon  Artemis  sporting  in  the  wild  wood.6 
When  she  appears  in  the  Theomachy  on  the  Trojan 
side,  and  we  are  in  hopes  of  finding  a  link  to  con- 
nect her  with  some  definite  prerogatives,  we  find  the 
Poem  so  contrived,  that  the  door  is  at  once  closed 


i  Od.  xi.  580. 
4  II.  i.  36. 


2  II.  xiv.  327. 
v.  447. 


3  II.  xxiv.  607. 
6  Od.  vi.  106. 


260 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


upon  our  curiosity  by  her  release  from  the  necessity 
of  combat. 

With  this  blankness  and  faintness,  let  us  now  com- 
pare the  high  ascriptions  of  her  dignity.  It  is  a  great 
note  of  honor,  that  this  inactive  and  hindward  deity 
should  find  a  place  in  the  Theomachy,  from  which 
Demeter  and  Aphrodite  are  excluded.  Hermes  is  her 
opponent.  But  when  the  time  for  action  comes,  he 
declines  the  fight :  he  will  not  lay  hands  on  the  spouse- 
of  Zeus  :  he  gives  her  free  leave  to  proclaim  that  she 
has  worsted  him.  She  makes  no  reply.1  Again,  it  is 
the  insult  to  Leto  as  the  mother  of  only  a  pair,  that 
is  so  fearfully  avenged  on  Niob£  and  her  children.2 
And  Tituos,  the  son  of  Gaia,  is  tortured  in  Tartaros, 
because  he  sought  to  offer  her  violence  as  she  was 
proceeding  to  the  Pythian  temple  of  her  son.3  In 
the  ascending  scale  of  the  mothers  of  his  offspring, 
she  is  placed  by  Zeus  after  Demeter  and  next  to 
Here.4 

Hesiod  marries  her  to  Zeus  before  Her£  ;  which,  con- 
sidering the  supreme  rank  of  Here  in  Olympos,  appears 
to  be  the  mark  of  some  very  old  tradition.  She  is 
junior,  among  the  consorts  he  assigns  to  Zeus,  only  to 
Metis,  or  the  Spirit  of  Counsel.  She  is  there  made  the 
daughter  of  Titan  ;  and,  in  the  Hymn  to  Apollo,  she 
appears  as  a  sister  of  Zeus,  and  a  daughter  of  Kronos 
himself.  But,  colorless  as  she  is  in  her  own  being,  all 
this  seems  to  be  a  marked  reflection  from  the  dignity 
of  Apollo. 

Some  have  explained  this  mute  yet  lofty  personage 
in  conformity,  as  they  think,  with  the  etymology  of  the 


i  II.  xxi.  497-501. 
3  Od.  xi.  580. 


2  II.  xxiv.  607. 
4  II.  xiv.  327. 


THE  DIVINITIES  OF  OLYMPOS. 


261 


name ;  and  they  regard  Leto  as  the  impersonation  of 
Night,  and  Night  as  the  mother  from  whose  womb 
Day,  or  the  Sun,  is  produced.  The  etymology  appears 
to  be  uncertain  :  yet  there  may  be  no  great  difficulty  in 
supposing  an  affinity  between  Leto  and  lateo,  and  a 
derivation  from  the  root  lath.1  Nor  is  it  any  con- 
clusive objection  to  this  theory,  that  we  have  already 
a  goddess  of  Night  in  Homer.2  For  this  might  be  the 
•  obsolete  Nature-Power,  standing  in  the  same  relation 
to  an  impersonated  Leto,  as  Gaia,  or  as  Demeter,  to 
Herd.  The  idea  that  the  Night  is  the  mother  of  the 
Sun,  and  also  is  the  Moon,  does  not  seem  to  be  an 
idea  much. more  likely  to  commend  itself  to  the  Greek 
mind  than  to  represent  Chaos  as  the  parent  of  Cos- 
mos, anarchy  of  order.  At  the  same  time  it  is  con- 
ceivable that  such  an  idea  might  find  place  in  a 
scheme  of  Nature-worship.  Nor  was  Apollo  united 
with  the  Sun  in  the  Olympian  scheme  of  Homer.  But, 
when  we  perceive  the  immense  reverence  accorded  to 
a  personage  who  is  without  any  attribute  or  office  in 
the  poems  except  motherhood,  we  cannot  but  refer  to 
the  motherhood  the  dignity  itself. 

It  is  quite  possible,  though  it  is  not  proved,  that 
there  may  have  been  in  the  Pelasgian  or  in  some  other 
mythology,  a  personage  who  may  be  the  base  of  the 
Homeric  Leto,  just  as  there  are  deities  who  form  the 
base,  or  a  base,  of  his  Apollo.  But  as  the  properties 
attaching  to  his  Apollo  appear  to  be  of  an  order  too 
high  to  be  justly  accounted  for  by  any  thing  we  find 
in  mere  mythology,  so,  and  even  more,  we  are  driven 
to  seek  outside  the  limits  of  the  system  a  mode  of 


1  Liddell  and  Scott,  in  voc.  lavdavw. 


2  H.  xiv.  261. 


262 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


accounting  for  the  majesty  and  reverence,  with  which 
the  Leto  of  Homer  is  surrounded. 

But  if  in  Apollo  there  are  exhibited,  together  with 
other  matter,  the  features  of  that  tradition  of  a  De- 
liverer, divine,  and  yet  in  human  form,  which  was 
handed  down  through  the  line  of  Patriarchs,  and  en- 
shrined in  the  Sacred  Scriptures,  we  have  to  bear  in 
mind  that  this  Deliverer  was  emphatically  described  as 
the  Seed  of  the  Woman.  Whether  by  the  woman  was 
meant  His  mother,  or  Eve,  the  general  mother  of  our 
race,  is  immaterial  to  our  present  purpose.  What 
appears  obvious  is  that,  if  such  a  tradition  imparted 
its  glory  to  the  character  of  'Apollo,  it  could  hardly  fail 
to  shed  a  portion  of  collateral  lustre  upon  the  person, 
in  whom  the  human  descent  was  signified  and  fore- 
shadowed. And  it  would  be  no  matter  of  wonder,  if 
the  human  figure  of  such  a  person  were  elevated  to  the 
Olympian  Court,  whose  manifold  orders  made  such  ad- 
mission easy,  and  whose  anthropomorphic  principle 
tended  to  efface  or  weaken  the  lines  of  separation 
between  its  divinities  and  mortal  man. 

I  conclude,  therefore,  that  in  Leto  we  have  a  record, 
and  a  sufficiently  clear  indication,  whether  wrought 
into  the  texture  of  any  current  mythological  legend, 
or  otherwise,  of  the  Hebrew  tradition  respecting  the 
Woman,  of  whose  seed  the  Deliverer  of  mankind  was 
to  be. 

Section  VI.  Demeter. 

The  text  of  Pausanias  exhibits  by  its  enumeration 
of  temples  and  remains,  though  it  does  not  explain, 
the  widespread  prevalence  and  the  great  local  impor- 
tance of  the  worship  of  Demeter  in  Greece.    And  this 


THE  DIVINITIES  OF  OLYMPOS. 


263 


picture  stands  in  marked  contrast  with  her  insignifi- 
cance in  the  action  of  the  Homeric  Poems,  and  in  the 
Olympian  system. 

We  may  safely  assign  to  her  one  of  the  twenty  chairs 
or  thrones,1  wrought  for  the  Assemblies  of  Immortals 
in  the  palace  of  Zeus.  But  she  nowhere  appears  as 
taking  part  in  those  Assemblies.  She  has  no  place  in 
the  Theomachy  or  in  the  War.  She  is  never  mentioned 
in  the  Poems  except  incidentally. 

The  actual  Homeric  evidence  concerning  Demeter  is 
as  follows :  — 

1.  Ground  corn,  or  meal,  is  called  Ar^r^Qog  avaij,  as 
fire  (or  flame)  is  called  (plo%  'H^alcxow?  This  is  one 
of  the  proper  associations  of  a  Nature-Power. 

2.  She  is  the  companion  of  Zeus  in  one  of  the  con- 
nections, which  he  relates  in  II.  xiv.  326.  Her  child 
is  not  named  by  the  Poet  either  there  or  elsewhere. 
But,  in  the  later  tradition,  we  find  associated  with  her, 
in  local  worship,  under  the  name  of  Core,  the  Damsel, 
a  great  and  even  awful  personage,  who  thus  fills  the 
gap  indicated  by  Homer,  and  who  probably  is  repre- 
sented by  his  Persephone%  queen  of  the  Underworld. 
Certainly  the  two  have  a  marked  correspondence  in 
character. 

3.  She  has  a  rs^evog  at  Purasos  in  Thessaly,3  and 
these  land-endowments,  as  far  as  we  can  discern  from 
Homer,  were  Pelasgian. 

4.  She  is  termed  Ivnlo-Aaixog  and  lavdrj,  fair-haired, 
and  golden-haired,  doubtless  with  reference  to  the 
idea  beautifully  expressed  by  Tibullus  : 4  4  JDeponit 
flavas  annua  terra  comas' 


1  II.  xviii.  373. 
3  II.  ii.  696. 


2  II.  xiii.  322 ;  xxi.  76. 
4  ii.  1.  48. 


264 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


5.  She  felt  and  gave  way  to  a  passion  for  a  son  or 
descendant  of  Iasos  ;  and  this  took  place  among  the 
fields.1  The  name  of  Iasos  is  obscure,  but  seems  to 
be  certainly  older  than  the  Hellenes.  Hesiod  enlarges 
the  tradition,  and  says  this  event  came  about  in  Crete, 
a  country  at  least  partially  marked  with  strong  Pelas- 
gic  features.2  This  powerful  element  of  lust  in  her 
character  tends  further  to  detach  her,  as  a  goddess, 
from  Hellenic  associations. 

6.  She  presides  over  the  operation  of  winnowing ; 
and  threshing-floors  are  consecrated  to  her.3 

The  later  tradition,  testifying  to  an  extensively  es- 
tablished worship  of  Demeter,  places  the  most  noted 
seat  of  it  in  Attica,  which  is  an  eminently  Pelasgian 
district,  with  Eleusis  for  its  head-quarter. 

In  the  Hymn  to  Demeter,  she  herself  founds  that 
worship  ;  and  reports  herself  as  having  come  thither, 
but  unwillingly,4  from  Crete.  This  tradition  may 
point  to  the  epoch  when  the  Phoenicians  acquired 
the  dominion  of  Crete.  It  certainly  points  to  some 
decisive  change  tending  to  displace  her  worship. 

Pausanias5  states,  that  there  was  in  his  time  a  tem- 
ple of  Demeter  Pelasgis  at  Corinth. 

Diodorus  6  reports  that  she  merely  represents  the 
character  of  Isis  in  the  Egyptian  mythology ;  that 
is  to  say,  as  earth-goddess  and  inventress  of  culti- 
vation. 

We  have  indeed  three  Homeric  personages,  all  of 
whom  appear  to  be  related  to  the  old  tradition  of 
Nature- worship,  which  made  Earth  a  deity,  and  a 

1  Od.  v.  125.  2  Theog.  971.  3  H.  v.  499-502. 

*  v.  123.  5  ii.  22.  2.  6  i.  13. 


THE  DIVINITIES  OF  OLYMPOS. 


265 


female  deity.1  The  share  of  Demeter  in  that  tradi- 
tion is  established  by  her  attributes  in  connection 
with  food,  and  by  her  name  of  Vq  pfcyQ,  Mother- 
earth. 

Detached  as  this  is  from  Hellenic  associations,  we 
cannot  be  surprised  at  our  not  finding  her  among  the 
Hellenizing  divinities  of  the  War.  Nor  is  it  very  dim- 
cult  to  conjecture  a  reason,  why  she  could  not  conven- 
iently appear  among  those  who  were  allies  of  Troy : 
namely  this,  that  in  Greece  her  personality  had  been 
sufficiently  severed  from  that  of  Gaia,  the  Earth-god- 
dess proper,  by  the  relegation  of  Gaia  to  the  Under- 
world, and  probably  by  the  prevalence  of  her  local 
worship,  to  allow  her  a  place  in  Olympos  ;  but  in 
Troas  it  would  seem  that  this  severance  may  not  have 
been  effected,  and  that  the  Earth-goddess  was  wor- 
shipped under  her  own  name,  like,  and  together  with, 
the  Sun.2 

Perhaps  the  same  line  of  thought  may  carry  us  to 
the  reason,  why  Demeter  appears  to  us  without  a 
daughter,  and  Persephone,  the  Awful,  without  a 
mother.  For  Persephone  is  the  queen  of  that  dark 
region  in  which  Gaia  dwells  :  but,  as  being  an  Hel- 
lenic deity,  she  cannot  have  a  Pelasgian  Nature-Power 
for  her  mother.  Neither  can  she  be  made  by  Homer 
the  daughter  of  Demeter,  because  Demeter  herself 
bears  many  signs  of  character  which  associate  her  with 
Gaia,  but  which  are  wholly  absent  from  the  picture  of 
Persephone". 

We  find  in  the  Albanian  language  the  same  form 
for  the  Earth  as  in  Demeter,  deou:3  though  it  is 


1  See  supra,  p.  241. 

3  Hahn,  Alb.  Stud.  Lexicon. 


2  II.  iii.  104. 


266 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


combined  with  a  form  not  found  in  that  tongue, 
which  gives  us  memme,  and  other  like  forms,  for 
mother. 

The  Demeter  of  Homer,  then,  seems  to  be  a  figure 
partially  Hellenized,  principally  of  Pelasgian  concep- 
tion, and  having  parts  of  its  material  in  Eastern 
tradition. 

In  Athens,  and  in  Olympia,  her  statue  stood  by 
that  of  Zeus : 1  and,  according  to  Herodotus,  the  Scy- 
thians treated  her  as  his  consort.  This  is  probably  no 
more  than  the  mythological  impersonation  given  to 
the  earth  as  the  female  or  passive  principle,  subjected 
to  the  action  of  air,  light,  and  sky.. 

Section  VII.  Dione. 

We  find  Dione  present  in  Olympos,  when  Aphrodite" 
arrives  there  after  her  wound,  and  is  received  as  her 
daughter.2  She  was  therefore  one  of  the  wives  of 
Zeus,  who  expressly  owns  Aphrodite  as  his  child : 3 
and  she,  again,  expressly  names  herself  as  one  of  the 
Olympian  gods.4  To  console  Aphrodite;,  she  relates 
how  Ares  had  suffered  at  the  hands  of  Otos  and  Ephi- 
altes,  Here;  and  Aides  at  the  hands  of  Heracles.  But 
there  is  nothing  in  the  passage  to  throw  light  upon  the 
origin  of  Dione;  herself;  and  it  is  the  only  passage  of 
Homer,  in  which  she  appears. 

We  learn  however  from  Hesiod,5  that  Dione;  was  one 
of  the  daughters  of  Okeanos  and  Tethus.  These 
daughters  were  sisters  to  the  Rivers.  Pherecydes,  an 
Athenian  logographer  of  the  fifth  century  before  Christ, 

i  Hahn,  Alb.  Stud.  Lexicon,  p.  251.  2  II.  v.  371,  373. 

3  II.  v.  428.  i  II.  v.  383.  5  Theog.  353. 


THE  DIVINITIES  OF  OLYMPOS. 


267 


represented  her  as  one  of  the  Nymphs  of  Dodona.1 
The  coins  of  Epiros  show  the  head  of  a  Zeus  of  Do- 
dona, the  Pelasgian  Zeus,  crowned  with  oak-leaf,2  an 
association  sustained  by  that  passage  of  the  Odyssey 
which  refers  to  the  oak,  from  which  the  oracles  were 
delivered.3  Together  with  the  head  of  Zeus  on  these 
coins  is  a  crowned  female  head,  which  cannot  be  the 
head  of  Her£,  as  she  belongs  only  to  the  Hellenic 
traditions.  Strabo4  says  that  Dione  shared  the  temple 
of  Zeus  at  Dodona. 

By  combining  together  the  fragments  of  this  infor- 
mation, we  may  come  with  reasonable  evidence  to  the 
conclusion,  that  Dion£  was  of  the  family  of  Nature- 
Powers  ;  and  that  in  this  character  she  was  associated 
with  the  elder  Zeus  of  the  Pelasgians,  the  air-god,  as 
his  wife.  Some  will  have  it,  that  she  was  the  mother 
of  Persephone.  In  Homer,  the  line  between  the  dei- 
ties of  the  Underworld  and  of  Olympos  is  broad,  and 
not  easily  crossed :  but  Dion£  is  the  mother  of  Aphro- 
dite, and  the  traditions  of  Aphrodite,  of  Persephone^ 
and  of  Artemis,  undoubtedly  intermix.  Upon  the  case 
of  Dion£,  we  may  make  the  general  observation,  that 
Homer  does  not  pursue  an  uniform  method  of  dealing 
with  the  divinities  of  all  the  old  Theogonies.  The  darker 
and  grosser  of  them,  related  to  the  earth,  pass  into  the 
Underworld.  But  Okeanos  remains,  I  suppose,  in  the 
Ocean-River ;  and  Nereus,  we  know,  inhabits  the  sea- 
depth,  with  his  family.  The  water  of  rivers  is  bound 
by  the  epithet  Diipetes  to  the  realm  and  to  the  idea  of 
the  air-god :  and  of  the  rivers  Dion£  was  the  reputed 
sister.   Therefore,  like  the  air-god  himself,  she  perhaps 

1  Creuzer,  Symbolik,  iv.  157.  2  lb.  iv.  156. 

3  Od.  xix.  297.  4  Strabo,  b.  vii.  p.  329  C. 


268 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


was  sufficiently  ethereal  in,  her  composition  to  pass, 
though  but  as  a  dimly-drawn  and  unimportant  person- 
age, into  the  Olympian  court. 

Section  VIII.  Athene  and  Apollo. 

These  two  are  by  far  the  most  remarkable  personages 
who  adorn  the  Olympos  of  Homer;  and  the  features, 
which  they  possess  in  common,  are  so  much  more 
numerous  and  significant  than  any  by  which  they  may 
be  separated,  that  it  will  be  convenient  to  treat  them 
together  for  the  purpose  of  bringing  those  common 
features  into  view.  Such  differences  as  subsist  between 
them  are  much  more  in  function,  than  in  character. 

But  I  speak  only  of  their  features  as  shown  in  the 
Homeric  text.  It  is  perfectly  possible  that  they  may 
severally  represent .  in  singleness  groups  of  traditions 
which  either  had  been,  or  which  afterwards  became,  the 
property  of  more  than  one  mythological  personage.  The 
names  of  these  may  be  wholly  distinct,  and  their  places, 
outside  the  Homeric  mythology,  far  apart.  But  the 
self-consistency  of  each  of  them,  upon  the  page  of  Homer, 
is  scarcely  less  remarkable  than  their  mutual  relation ; 
a  relation  which  at  one  and  the  same  time  both  associ- 
ates them  with  one  another,  and  severs  them  from  most 
of  the  other  members  of  the  Olympian  Court. 

Their  action,  however,  in  the  Poems  is  so  extensive 
and  multiform,  that  it  will  not  be  possible  to  exhibit  all 
its  particulars :  nor  is  there  the  same  need  for  such  an 
operation  as  in  cases  where  the  evidence  is  scanty. 

Still,  it  is  the  more  needful  to  make  a  comprehensive 
and  accurate  survey  of  their  attributes  and  offices,  be- 
cause upon  the  cases  of  these  two  deities  will  mainly 


THE  DIVINITIES  OF  OLYMPOS. 


269 


turn  the  answer  to  be  given  to  the  interesting  and  im- 
portant question,  whether  there  is  oris  not  any  sensible 
infusion  into  the  Homeric  system  of  the  ideas  related  to 
the  redemption  of  mankind,  which  have  been  preserved 
in  the  Holy  Bible  and  among  the  Hebrews,  and  which 
may  be  termed  for  convenience  Messianic.  To  their 
case,  however,  that  of  Leto  is  an  important  auxiliary. 

1.  Unless  we  explain  their  position  in  the  Olympian 
system  by  the  aid  of  the  Hebrew  traditions,  it  offers  to 
our  view  a  hopeless  solecism.  The  Olympian  gods  are 
arranged  generally  in  two  generations.  The  really 
great  governing  powers  are  given  to  the  elder  of  the 
two,  to  Zeus,  Poseidon,  and  to  Here" ;  with  a  parity  of 
'dignity,  though  not  of  influence,  to  Aidoneus.  All  the 
three  first,  in  one  way  or  other,  are  representations  of 
some  conception  of  the  Supreme  Being  which  had  pre- 
vailed elsewhere,  or  at  an  earlier  epoch.  But  Athene^ 
and  Apollo  present  no  such  character  ;  and,  standing 
as  they  do  in  the  junior  line,  we  are  obliged  to  ask,  why 
do  these  two  junior  deities  alone,  and  in  a  manner  which 
cannot  be  mistaken,  share  and  exercise. the  prerogatives 
of  supreme  deity  and  government  ?  Inferior  only  in 
some  respects  to  Zeus,  they  show  no  inferiority  in  any, 
and  in  some  a  marked  superiority,  to  Herd  or  Poseidon. 

It  is  true  indeed  that  both  Athene  and  Apollo  recog- 
nize the  rights  of  the  Uncle,  as  the  Senior,  in  Poseidon. 
And,  if  I  am  right  in  considering  him  as  having  been  the 
supreme  god  of  a  foreign  mythology,  who  was  afterwards 
naturalized  in  the  Hellenic  system,  we  may  readily  under- 
stand why,  notwithstanding  the  coarse  material  of  his 
being,  he,  too,  is  always  shielded  from  palpable  dishonor. 
Yet  neither  is  he  suffered  to  inflict  any  disgrace  or  shame 
on  Athene!  or  Apollo.    In  the  case  of  Apollo,  the  two 


270 


JUYENTUS  MUNDI. 


part  without  fighting.1  In  the  case  of  Athene,  Poseidon 
withdraws  when  Odysseus  is  about  to  pass  beyond  the 
special  sphere  of  that  god  ;2  and  the  goddess  then  re- 
sumes the  conduct  of  the  affairs  of  the  hero,  and  guides 
them  to  a  happy  issue.  And  when,  in  the  disguise  of 
Mentor,  she  attends  the  sacrifice  of  Nestor,  and  offers 
prayer  to  Poseidon,  the  Poet  adds, 4 so  she  prayed;  and 
of  herself  accomplished  all  the  prayer.' 3 

Yet  more  notable  is  the  relation  of  rank  as  between 
Here*  and  Athene.  Once  Athene  appears,  namely  in  the 
Debate  of  the  First  Book,  as  the  messenger  of  Her£,  to 
prevent  the  wrath  of  Achilles  from  bursting  into  flagrant 
violence  : 4  as  though  Here  had  a  title  to  employ  her  ser- 
vices. Yet,  even  in  this 'case,  Here*,  it  should  be  re- 
marked, supplies  no  instructions ;  and  Athene*  frames 
her  discourse  after  her  own  will,  and  with  no  regard  to 
the  special  inclination  of  Here  for  Agamemnon.  But 
elsewhere  Homer  has  not  scrupled  to  give  to  Athene*  the 
first  place.  Twice  the  goddesses  descend  together  from 
Olympos  to  the  field  of  battle,  in  the  chariot  of  Her£. 
It  is  Here*  who  yokes  the  horses,  and  acts  as  charioteer. 
Athene*  not  only  mounts  as  the  warrior  beside  her,  but 
bears  the  Aigis  of  supreme  power.5 

When  Thetis  arrives  at  Olympos, in  the  Twenty-fourth 
Iliad,  she  receives  the  honors  of  a  guest,  and  is  placed 
by  the  side  of  Zeus,  Athene*  giving  way  to  her.  She 
probably  held  the  second  seat  of  rank  on  the  left  side, 
the  first  being,  as  we  need  not  doubt,  given  to  Here\ 
It  is  Her£,  again,  who  sends  the  Sun  to  his  repose.6 
On  the  whole,  an  ingenious  division  of  ascriptions  seems 


i  II.  xxi.  468. 

3  Od.  iii.  55-62. 

5  II.  v.  711-752 ;  viii.  381-896. 


2  Od.  v.  380. 
4  II.  i.  195. 
6  II.  xviii.  239. 


THE  DIVINITIES  OF  OLYMPOS. 


271 


to  be  carried  through,  by  means  of  which  Here  has  the 
higher  place  in  the  internal  relations  of  Olynipos,  but 
AthenS  far  excels  in  all  that  immediately  touches  the 
government  of  men. 

And  now  as  to  the  dignity  of  Apollo. 

In  the  ancient  Hymn  to  this  god,  cited  by  Thucy- 
dides,  it  is  told  that  the  gods  rise  from  their  seats  as 
he  comes  near.1 

The  superiority  thus  awarded  to  Apollo  cannot  be 
accounted  for  by  anything  in  the  mere  order  of  Olym- 
pos, which  it  seems,  indeed,  to  contravene.  The  child 
of  Leto  the  obscure  is  preferred  to  the  child  of  great 
Here.  In  a  time  of  wild  men  and  deeds,  a  god  pre- 
siding over  peaceful  functions  infinitely  outshines  the 
god  of  war.  We  must  seek  for  the  reason,  then,  in 
traditions  flowing  from  another  source. 

2.  In  the  Fifth  Iliad,  Homer  appears  to  inform  us, 
that  Athene  was  born  of  Zeus  without  a  mother ; 2  a 
statement  afterwards  developed  in  the  legend,  which 
represents  her  as  having  sprung  full-grown  from  his 
head.  Now  if  the  Hellenes  had  preserved  the  tradition 
of  the  Logos,  it  was  impossible  to  clothe  it,  for  the 
purposes  of  their  system,  in  a  more  appropriate  form. 
If  they  had  not,  how  comes  it  that  we  have  this  one 
only  exception  made  to  the  accustomed  method  of 
parentage?  —  a  method  so  deeply  ingrained  in  the 
Greek  ideas,  that  even  for  Zeus  a  father  must  be  found. 

But  Apollo  is  the  child  of  Leto  ;  and  Leto,  if  we  can 
give  the  word  a  meaning,  means  darkness  or  oblivion. 
If  Apollo  be  considered  as  the  Sun,  the  name  of  his 
mother  may  signify  his  birth  from  Night.    But  the 


1  Hymn,  2-4. 


2  II.  y.  880. 


272 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


Apollo  of  Homer's  Olympos  is  not  the  Sun ;  and  of  his 
functions  a  very  large  portion  have  no  relation  to  the 
Night  whatever.  But  if  Homer  saw  in  his  Apollo  a 
son  of  his  Zeus,  whose  filial  relation  rested  upon  tra- 
ditions anterior  to  any  which  the  current  mythologies 
supplied,  and  if  the  word  Leto  expressed  such  an  ob- 
scurity, this  surely  appears  to  supply  a  rational  and 
consistent  explanation. 

Thus  the  differences  between  the  birth  of  Athene 
and  that  of  Apollo,  according  to  Homer,  correspond 
with  the  differences  between  the  two  forms  of  the 
Messianic  tradition  represented  respectively  in  the 
Logos,  and  the  Son  of  the  Woman. 

3.  But  while  the  rank  and  the  power  of  these  deities 
were  traceable  to  those  of  Zeus  in  the  Olympian  sys- 
tem, it  is  plain  that  their  dignity,  their  sanctitas, 
was  greater  than  his.  They  were  regarded  with  a 
more  unmixed  reverence,  as  if  the  traditions  relating 
to  them  had  been  kept  more  free  from  earthy  elements. 
These  propositions  do  not  rest  merely  on  the  general 
mode  of  handling  them  in  Homer,  but  upon  distinct 
and  well-defined  notes.  They  are  never  exhibited  in 
the  mood  of  sensual  passion,  like  Zeus  and  Here,  to 
say  nothing  of  lesser  deities.  This  is  true,  without 
the  least  qualification,  of  Athene.  Apollo  is  stated  to 
have  carried  off  Marpessa  the  bride  of  Ideus  ; 1  and  he 
enters  into  the  ribald  jesting  of  Olympos  in  the  Lay  of 
the  Net.2  But  the  latter  story,  as  has  already  been 
observed,  is  conceived  in  the  spirit  of  a  foreign  my- 
thology ;  and  with  respect  to  Marpessa,  it  may  be 
remarked,  that  the  numerous  intrigues  of  the  mythical 


1  U.  iv.  559-564. 


a  Od.  viii.  334. 


THE  DIVINITIES  OF  OLYMPOS. 


273 


gods  in  Homer  are  never  accompanied  with  violence, 
but  are  invariably  made  to  appear  as  connections  volun- 
tarily accepted ;  while  again  they  are  always  attended 
with  the  birth  of  children.  In  both  particulars  this 
story  differs  from  them,  and  it  much  more  resembles 
that  of  Ganymede,1  who  was  carried  up  to  be  cup- 
bearer in  heaven.  Perhaps  we  are  to  understand  that 
she  was  taken  for  the  service  of  the  deity  at  the 
neighboring  shrine  of  Delphi,  where  a  priestess  so  long 
officiated. 

But  again,  these  deities,  and  these  alone,  are  never 
subjected  to  disparagement  in  any  other  form.  Here, 
as  we  have  seen,  had  once  been  wounded,  and  Zeus 
had  been,  or  was  about  to  be,  enchained ;  but  to  these 
two  no  violence  is  ever  offered.  Further,  Zeus  is  on 
the  very  verge  of  open  conflict  with  Poseidon ;  but  in 
the  Theomachy,  the  battle  between  Apollo  and  his 
uncle  is  avoided,  while  Athene  inflicts  a  terrible  re- 
verse on  her  huge  opponent  Ares.  Again,  Zeus  him- 
self is,  for  the  time,  completely  baffled  and  outwitted 
by  the  stratagem  of  Here  ;  and  the  Hellenizing  Posei- 
don is  enabled  to  take  the  field  against  his  orders. 
But  neither  Athene^  nor  Apollo  are  ever  deceived  or 
visibly  put  to  shame. 

Nor  will  this  appear  an  easy  matter  to  arrange, 
when  it  is  borne  in  mind  that  these  two  are  the  great 
agents  of  the  two  great  Olympian  deities  respectively. 
It  is,  however,  carefully  contrived  that  they  shall  never 
come  into  actual  collision  one  with  the  other.  Apollo 
interferes  against  Patroclos ;  but  Athene  is  absent. 
Athene  interferes  against  Hector ;  but  Apollo  is  absent. 


i  II  xx.  234. 
18 


274 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


Again  he  is  absent,  in  the  Doloneia,  while  she  con- 
ducts to  a  prosperous  issue  the  night-expedition  of 
Diomed  and  Odysseus.1  In  the  Chariot-race  of  the 
Twenty-third  Book,  where  the  contest  for  the  first 
place  is  between  Eumelos  and  Diomed,  Apollo,  the 
partisan  of  Eumelos,  throws  the  whip  of  Diomed  out 
of  his  hand.2  Athene  restores  it,  apparently  when 
Apollo  has  departed,  and  by  breaking  the  chariot-yoke 
of  Eumelos  secures  the  victory  of  her  favorite.  Apollo 
here,  though  saved  as  far  as  the  Poet's  art  can  do  it, 
comes  off  second  best ;  but  only  as  against  Athene. 
A  second  instance  occurs,  where  he  is  brought  to  sug- 
gest, at  a  time  when  the  Greeks  3  were  losing  ground, 
in  lieu  of  the  general  conflict,  a  personal  challenge 
from  Hector,  which  was  sure  to  be  to  their  advantage. 
To  appreciate  the  importance  of  this  consideration,  we 
must  observe  how  other  deities  are  liable  to  be  foiled 
and  worsted  :  Ares  by  Athene  in  the  Fifth  Iliad,  and  by 
Hephaistos  in  the  Eighth  Odyssey  ;  Herd  and  A'idoneus 
by  Heracles  ;  Artemis  by  Here  in  the  Theomachy  ;  Aph- 
rodite by  Diomed  ;  Demeter,4  and  Herd  too,5  by  Zeus. 
Zeus  himself  was  delivered  from  a  conspiracy  by  ex- 
traneous aid. 

There  is  a  manifest  difference  to  be  observed  as  to 
the  relations  of  will  and  affection  with  Zeus,  between 
these  two  and  the  other  deities.  These  alone  he  calls 
by  the  epithet  '  dear.' 6  The  case  of  Apollo  stands 
alone  as  an  exhibition  of  entire  unbroken  harmony 
with  the  will  of  Zeus,  which  in  all  things  he  regards. 
When  he  remonstrates,  it  is  with  the  body  of  the  gods, 

i  II.  x.  515.         2  II.  xxiii.  384.         3  n.  vii.  20.         4  Od.  v. 
5  II.  xv.  18.         6  II.  viii.  39,  xxii.  183  ;  and  xv.  221,  xvi.  667. 


THE  DIVINITIES  OF  OLYMPOS. 


275 


not  with  Zeus  personally;1  and  HerS,  rebuking  him 
for  his  interference,  is  at  once  checked  by  Zeus.2 
Though  he  seems  to  be  the  habitual  organ  for  accom- 
plishing his  father's  designs,  he  is  never  so  employed 
in  any  purpose  which  is  about  to  fail ;  such,  for  in- 
stance, as  would  have  been  the  defence  of  Sarpedon. 
Zeus  himself  is  by  no  means  so  carefully  shielded,  in 
great  providential  matters,  as  Apollo. 

The  necessities  of  the  Poem  place  Athene^  in  antag- 
onism to  Zeus,  and  she  goes  all  lengths  in  the  prose- 
cution of  her  purposes.  But,  if  in  opposition  to  the 
chief  deity,  she  is  on  the  side  not  only  of  justice,  but  of 
the  Olympian  decree,  to  which  Zeus  himself,  his  per- 
sonal partialities  leaning  one  way,  and  his  governing 
responsibility  another,  has  felt  it  right  to  yield.  She 
exposes  herself,  together  with  Hei*§,  to  his  threats ; 
but  his  anger,  in  her  case,  is  on  account  of  her  threat- 
ening him  on  a  special  and  rare  occasion,3  while  HerS 
ever  leads  him  an  uneasy  life  ; 4  and  he  seems  anxious 
to  take  the  first  opportunity  of  reassuring  her5  as  his 
beloved  daughter. 

We  have,  then,  in  the  case  of  Apollo,  an  uniform 
identity  of  will  with  the  chief  god,  and  in  the  case  of 
AthenS  only  an  exceptional  departure  from  it.  This 
is  a  very  remarkable  feature.  In  Here  and  Poseidon, 
it  is  wholly  wanting.  In  Hermes  and  Iris  we  find  the 
obedience  of  messengers,  but  not  the  unity  of  counsel 
and  of  mind.  In  general,  such  harmony  can  no  more 
broadly  be  asserted  of  Olympos,  than  of  a  kingdom  or 
court  on  earth.  No  traditions  known  to  me  appear  in 
any  way  to  account  for  it,  except  those  of  the  Hebrew 

1  H.  xxiv.  33.  2  H.  xxiy.  65.  3  H.  viii.  406-408. 

4  ii,  i.  561-563.  &  II.  viii.  39. 


276 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


race.  It  is  evidently  the  very  picture  for  which  they 
are  calculated  to  furnish  the  materials. 

The  Hellenic  religion  represents  Apollo  as  the  de- 
fender of  Heaven,  and  the  Deliverer  of  the  Immortals, 
in  some  great  peril  or  struggle  of  contending  spirits. 
He  destroyed  Otos  and  Ephialtes,  the  hugest,  and  after 
Orion  the  most  beautiful,  of  all  beings  reared  on  earth, 
at  the  critical  time  when  they  are  about  to  scale  heaven 
by  piling  the  mountains. 

This  function  has  no  natural  connection  with  the 
mythological  offices  of  Apollo,  great  and  varied  as  they 
are.  Neither  as  physician,  harper,  poet,  prophet, 
archer,  nor  angel  of  death,  can  he  appear  entitled  to 
claim  the  honor  thus  awarded  to  him.  There  is  also 
in  Homer  a  glance  at  a  general  rebellion  of  the  Giants 
and  at  their  fall  *in  consequence  of  their  impiety.1 
The  later  tradition  retains,  down  to  the  Augustan  age, 
this  account  of  Apollo  with  a  diversity  of  accompani- 
ments. In  Homer,  as  the  account  is  by  no  means  to 
be  explained  through  his  Olympian  offices,  it  appears 
to  represent  some  older  tradition,  according  to  which 
this  bright  and  lofty  person,  intimately  associated  with, 
and  specially  executing  on  earth,  the  divine  will,  had 
likewise  put  down  in  actual  battle  a  rising  of  rebellious 
spirits  in  the  Upper  world. 

To  Athene  there  is  assigned  by  Homer  no  function 
resembling  this.  But  the  specialties  of  a  certain 
divine  supremacy  are  in  a  manner  divided  between 
them.  Athene  takes  a  peculiar  jurisdiction  in  the 
Underworld  ;  and  it  is  the  more  remarkable  because, 
while  she  uses  it  in  aid  of  Zeus,  it  does  not  come  by 


i  Od.  yii.  56-60. 


THE  DIVINITIES  OF  OLYMPOS. 


277 


derivation  from  him.  She  declares  1  that  but  for  her, 
Heracles,  when  he  went  to  fetch  Cerberus,  never  would 
have  escaped  the  dire  streams  of  Styx.  This  seems  to 
mean  that  Zeus  could  not  have  delivered  him. 

Lastly,  we  cannot  fail  to  observe  how  the  powers 
and  offices  of  these  two  deities  encroach  upon  and  cut 
across  the  provinces  of  other  recognized  divinities,  with 
a  total  absence  of  any  reciprocity  in  regard  to  what 
may  be  called  their  special  function.  Athene^,  as  the 
goddess  of  war,  not  only  rivals  Ares,  but  excels  him. 
She  is  the  goddess  of  art,  like  Hephaistos,  with  some 
distinction,  indeed,  as  he  operates  upon  metals  with  the 
aid  of  fire,  and  she  ordinarily  on  tissues.  Yet  not  so 
as  to  limit  her  power ;  for  she,  together  with  Hephais- 
tos, instructs  the  silversmith  in  all  the  departments  of 
his  art ; 2  and  moreover  teaches  mensuration  to  the 
carpenter.3  She  presides  over  industry  and  over  cun- 
ning, like  Hermes ;  and  she  shares  with  this  deity  his 
special  function  as  conductor  of  the  dead.4  Again,  in 
parts  of  her  relation  to  Polity,  as  'AyalEir/,5  Xaooooog,6 
GQvahtzohg?  she  approaches  to  the  office  of  Themis :  8 
who  summons  and  dissolves  assemblies,  thus  dis- 
charging subordinate  functions  apparently  on  behalf 
of  the  primary  political  deity. 

Apollo,  as  the  healer,  discharges  the  office  of  Paieon. 
But  while  Paieon,9  who  is  somewhat  strongly  marked 
as  a  deity  of  the  Egyptian  system,  heals  with  the 
hand,10  Apollo  has  too  high  a  dignity  to  be  thus  rep- 

i  II.  viii.  362-369 ;  cf.  Od.  xi.  623-626.  2  Qd.  vi.  233,  xxiii.  160. 
3  H.  xv.  412.  4  Od.  xi.  626  ;  cf.  xxiv.  1. 

5  'kye?iELrj  —  Spoil-driver,  or  Folk-leader. 

ti  "kaoaaoog  =  Folk-stirrer.  7  epvatTcroTiLg  —  City-warder. 

8  Od.  ii.  69.    II.  xx.  4.         9  Od.  iv.  231.  w  n.  y.  401. 


278 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


resented.  He  simply  deposits  the  stunned  ^Eneas 
in  his  temple,  where  Leto  and  Artemis  proceed  to 
treat  him  : 1  or,  in  answer  to  the  prayer  of  Glaucos, 
heals  from  afar  the  wound  of  that  gallant  warrior.2 

Apollo,  as  the  musician,  is  supreme  in  the  province 
of  the  Muses  ;  who  are  purely  poetical  and  Hellenic 
impersonations,  sometimes  one  in  number,  sometimes 
nine.3  His  concern  is  with  the  instrument,  theirs  with 
the  voice ;  but  they  perform  together  at  the  Olympian 
banquet,4  and  have,  probably,  a  community  of  relation 
to  the  Bard. 

Apollo,  as  the  agent  of  Zeus,  moves  in  the  same 
province  as  Hermes  and  Iris,  especially  the  latter : 
but  the  highest  offices  are  always  reserved  to  him,  in 
which  the  Divine  intention  is  to  take  effect.  It  is  left 
to  Hermes  to  conduct  Priam  to  the  presence  of  Achilles, 
when  the  object  is  only  that  of  a  go-between,  and  the 
result  depends  upon  the  will  of  the  hero. 

In  the  4  Studies  on  Homer '  I  called  by  the  name  of 
Secondaries 5  the  deities  who  are  thus  placed,  even  in 
their  own  departments,  below  Apollo  and  Athene\ 
Perhaps  the  name  is  not  appropriate,  since  these  per- 
sonages have  in  general  independent  traditions  of  their 
own.  The  main  point  is  that  we  should  observe  the 
approach  to  a  divine  universality  of  office  and  power 
in  Apollo  and  Athene; ,  which  can  in  no  respect  be 
accounted  for  by  the  formation  of  the  Olympian  family 
or  its  laws. 

Let  us  now  turn  to  points  connected  with  the  human 
and  terrestrial  relations  of  these  gr^at  deities. 

I'll.  v.  445-447.  2  II.  xvi.  527-529.  3  Od.  xxiv.  60. 

4  II.  i.  603,  604.  5  Vol.  ii.  p.  59. 


THE  DIVINITIES  OF  OLYMPOS. 


279 


They  are  jointly  invoked,  together  with  Zeus,  in  a 
solemn  but  often-repeated  formula  expressing  keen  de- 
sire ;  as  when  Achilles  prays,  1  Father  Zeus!  and 
Athene  !  and.  Apollo  !  would  that  every  Trojan  should 
perish,  and  every  Greek.' 1 

And  they  are  placed  at  the  climax  of  honor  in 
another  formula : 2 

'  Were  I  honored  as  are  honored  Athene  and  Apollo/ 

This  line  suggests  the  question  whether,  in  the  time 
of  Homer,  some  visible  form  of  worship  may  possibly 
have  been  paid  to  these  two  deities,  as  the  agents  of  a 
Supreme  God,  presumed  to  be  less  accessible  than 
they,  and  was  at  the  same  time  not  accorded  to  others. 
Be  this  as  it  may,  they  are  the  only  deities  whose 
temples  are  unequivocally  named  to  us  in  Homer  :  the 
temple  of  Apollo3  at  Chrus£,  on  Pergamos,  and  at 
Putho  :  the  temple  of  Athene 4  at  Athens,  on  Per- 
gamos, and  in  Scherie\ 

Again,  we  do  not  find  any  local  limit  to  the  worship 
of  these  deities  within  the  sphere  of  Greek  knowledge 
and  experience.  Athene,  the  most  Hellenic  deity,  is 
the  patroness  of  Pelasgian  Attica,  and  is  also  the  object 
of  the  supplicatory  procession  of  Trojan  women  in  the 
Sixth  Iliad.  She  is  worshipped  at  Pulos,  in  Ithaca,,  in 
the  Greek  camp.  Apollo,  the  great  Trojan  deity, 
has  his  priest  among  the  Kicones,  his  temple  at  Putho, 
his  altar  in  Delos,  his  grove  and  festival  in  Ithaca ; 
and  he  is  the  fountain-head  of  the  prophetic  gift,  which 
pervades  all  parts  of  Greece.    He  is  connected  with 

1  II.  xvi.  97.  2  ii.  Viii.  540 ;  xiii.  827. 

3  II.  i.  39 ;  v.  445 ;  ix.  404. 

*  II.  ii.  549  j  vi.  88,  297.    Od.  vi.  320-322. 


280 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


Kille,  with  Lycia  in  the  south,  and  with  the  Lyeian 
Trojans  in  the  north  of  Asia  Minor.  Seers,  whom  he 
always  endows  with  vision,  are  found  1  even  among  the 
Cyclops.  He  feeds  the  horses  of  Admetos  in  Picric, 
claims  the  daughter  of  Marpessa  in  iEtolia,  and  slays 
the  children  of  Niobe  near  Mount  Sipulos.  In  truth, 
he  seems  scarcely  less  universal  than  that  scourge  of 
Death,  to  which  he  stands  in  so  near  and  solemn  a 
relation. 

No  deity  of  the  Poems,  except  Zeus,  can  at  all  com- 
pete with  Apollo  and  Athene  in  this  respect. 

Next,  Apollo  and  Athene*  are  independent  of  all  the 
limitations  of  place  :  another  point  in  which  no  other 
deity,  but  Zeus,  appears  to  resemble  them. 

Athens,  indeed,  appears  to  be  indicated  in  the  Odys- 
sey as  the  abode  of  Athene.2  Apollo  has  no  abode 
directly  assigned  to  him.  But  the  sign  of  omnipres- 
ence in  both  is,  that  prayer  is  addressed  to  them  from 
all  places  indifferently.  Only  four  times 3  do  we  find 
actual  petitions  to  Apollo,  and  all  these  in  Troas.  But 
we  may  observe  this  essential  point ;  that,  as  in  the 
two  last  of  these  for  example,  he  is  presumed  to  be 
present,  and  to  hear  it  as  a  matter  of  course,  without 
reference  to  any  special  residence  or  function.  To 
Athene  we  have  no  less  than  twelve  prayers  given  in 
the  Poems,  in  Ithaca,  ScheriS,  Pulos,  Troy,  and  the 
Greek  camp ;  and  always  to  her  as  an  universal  not  a 
local  power.  But  even  Poseidon,  great  as  he  is,  never 
has  prayer  offered  to  him,  except  near  the  sea,  or  by 
his  own  descendants. 


i  Od.  ix.  508.  2  Od.  vii.  80,  81. 

3  II.  i.  35-43 ;  450-457  ;  iv.  100-103, 116-131 ;  xvi.  513-529.  Add, 
however,  the  references  in  II.  xi.  363,  364,  and  i.  65,  473. 


THE  DIVINITIES  OF  OLYMPOS. 


281 


In  truth,  but  a  small  number  of  deities  in  Homer 
are  made  the  subjects  of  actual  invocation.  For  ex- 
ample, there  is  no  invocation  anywhere  to  Aphrodite, 
Ares,  Hermes,  Hephaistos,  Demeter,  or  even  Here\ 
Artemis  1  and  Poseidon  are  invoked :  the  first  in  con- 
nection with  function,  the  latter  with  place.  We  have 
also  addresses  from  mortals  to  the  deities  presiding 
over  the  Oath,  or  ruling  in  the  Underworld.  But 
general  prayer  is  addressed  only  to  Zeus,  Pallas,  and 
Apollo. 

Again,  these  favored  deities  are  exempt  from  physical 
or  other  infirmity  or  need  in  general.  They  are  never 
excited  by  mere  personal  passion.  Neither  of  them 
individually  eats  or  drinks  ;  as  Hermes,  for  example, 
does,  at  the  dwelling  of  Calypso,2  or  as  Iris  fears  lest 
she  should  lose  her  share  of  the  Ethiopian  hecatomb.3 
Neither  of  them  sleeps,  or  is  weary,  or  is  wounded,  or 
suffers  pain.  They  are  never  introduced  as  delighting 
in  sacrifice  apart  from  obedience.  Artemis  sends  the 
boar  to  Caludon  because  she  had  been  forgotten  in  the 
offerings:4  but  Apollo's  wrath, in  the  First  Iliad, is  not 
for  the  want  of  prayer  or  hecatomb,  it  is  on  account  of 
the  shame  and  wrong  done  by  Agamemnon  to  Ohruses 
his  priest.5  Diomed  and  Odysseus  are  dear  to  Pallas  : 
but  she  never  asks  or  commends  their  bounty  at  the 
altar,  as  Zeus  commends  that  of  Hector,  and  of  Odys- 
seus himself.6  When  sacrifice  is  offered  to  Apollo,  in  the 
First  Iliad,7 after  the  restitution, his  pleasure  is  not  stated 
to  have  been  in  the  savor  of  it,  but  in  the  hymn  of  praise 
which  was  addressed  to  him .  Zeus  can  accept  the  victims 


1  Od.  xx.  61. 
4  II.  ix.  536. 
1  II.  i.  473. 


2  Od.  v.  94. 
5  II.  i.  65,  93. 


3  II.  xxiii.  207. 
6  II.  xxiv.  68.    Od.  i.  66. 


282 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


even  while  he  frustrates  the  petition : 1  but  when  Athene 
in  like  manner  declines  a  prayer  of  the  Trojans,  she  is 
not  stated  to  accept  the  offering;2  and  the  idea  that 
when  offended  she  can  be  appeased  by  mere  offerings  is 
thus  practically  repudiated.3 

Again,  attributes  of  bulk  stand  at  the  bottom  of  the 
scale  of  excellence.  They  are  indirectly  assigned  to 
Pallas  by  the  weight  of  the  Aigis  which  she  carries.4 
This  is  possibly  on  account  of  the  direct  competition 
which  subsists  between  the  huge  Ares,  as  a  god  of  war, 
and  herself,  presiding  over  the  same  province.5  Bulk 
is  never  ascribed  to  Apollo. 

Again,  as  to  locomotion.  Apollo  and  Athene  move 
without  the  use  of  any  instruments,  such  as  wings, 
chariots,  or  otherwise.  Their  journeys  are  usually 
undistributed  and  instautaneous.  They  set  out,  and 
they  arrive.6  On  one  occasion  only,  Athene*  employs 
the  foot-wings7  which  were  used  by  Hermes.  But  there 
are  details  and  steps  in  the  movements  of  Hermes, 
Poseidon,  and  Here.8 

The  ordinary  Olympian  deity,  when  offended  by 
mortals,  most  commonly  makes  his  appeal  to  Zeus 
for  redress.  Thus  Poseidon  acts  with  respect  to  the 
Greek  rampart ;  Aphrodite,  tacitly,  after  her  wound 
by  Diomed  ;  Ares,  in  the  same  condition;  and  Helios, 
after  his  oxen  have  been  devoured  by  the  crew  of 
Odysseus.9 

But  the  retributive  action  of  Apollo,  in  the  Plague  of 

i  It.  ii.  420.  2  II.  vi.  311.  3  Od.  iii.  143-147. 

4  II.  ii.  448.  5  See  II.  xviii.  516. 

6  Od.  i.  102-103.    II.  xv.  150.  7  Od.  i.  96. 

8  Od.  v.  50-58.    II.  xiii.  17-31 ;  xiv.  225-230. 

9  II.  v.  869,  426  ;  vii.  445.    Od.  xii.  377-388. 


THE  DIVINITIES  OF  OLYMPOS. 


283 


the  First  Iliad,  is  wholly  independent,  and  is  the  more 
remarkable  since  he  wastes  the  army  of  the  Greeks  to 
the  great  peril  of  an  enterprise  promoted  by  such  power- 
ful divinities.  In  the  Third  Odyssey,1  on  the  return  of  the 
Greeks,  we  are  told  that  Zeus  designed  evil  for  them  by 
reason  of  their  crimes,  wherefore  many  perished  by  the 
wrath  of  Pallas  ;  that  she  could  not  be  appeased,  and  that 
Zeus  suspended  calamity  over  them.  There  is  no  sign  here 
of  an  appeal  to  Zeus,  but  rather  of  an  identification  of  the 
two  agencies  in  the  providential  government  of  the  world. 

Again,  Apollo  and  Athene  administer  powers  which 
are  otherwise  the  special  or  exclusive  property  of  Zeus. 

The  air-functions  of  that  deity  are  sometimes,  indeed, 
exercised  by  Here.  This  may  reasonably  be  accounted 
for  by  her  relation  to  him  as  wife.  No  kindred  reason 
is  available  for  the  selection  of  these  two  among  his  chil- 
dren for  an  office  so  elevated-.  Athene^,  with  Her£, 
thunders  in  honor  of  Agamemnon : 2  and  she  can  cause 
the  winds  to  cease,  or  to  blow.3  So  he  too  sends  for  the 
Greek  ship  a  toward  breeze.4  But  the  most  significant 
of  all  the  participations  of  the  supreme  power  is  confined 
to  Athene  with  Apollo.  Both  of  them  in  turn  carry  the 
Aigis  in  the  Fifth  and  Fifteenth  Iliads  respectively.5 
And,  in  truth,  these  two  deities  seem  throughout  the 
Iliad  to  share  with  Zeus  the  function  of  Providence ; 
the  one  as  towards  the  Trojans,  the  other  as  towards 
the  Greeks.6  Indeed,  in  the  Odyssey  more  especially, 
they  fill  the  very  highest  offices  of  divine  government 
over  the  minds  of  men ;  which  appear  to  be  conducted 
by  Pallas,  much  more  than  by  Zeus  himself. 

i  Od.  iii.  132  seqq.  2  n.  xi.  45. 

3  Od.  v.  109,  382-385,  et  alibi.  4  n.  i.  479. 

5  II.  v.  735-742 ;  xv.  229. 

6  See  Studies  on  Homer,  Olympos,  pp.  115-122. 


284 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


There  is  a  very  peculiar  function  attaching  to  the 
divine  supremacy,  in  the  signification  of  coming  events 
to  men  by  the  flight  of  birds,  and  by  atmospheric  signs. 
This  power,  being  connected  with  the  future,  is  dis- 
tinguished from  the  general  power  over  external  nature. 
It  is  shared  with  Zeus  principally  by  Apollo,  but  also  by 
Athene\  He  sends  the  Kirkos,  or  wheeling  falcon,  to 
Thrace,  as  an  omen  of  success  to  Telemachos  r1  she,  a 
heron  to  cheer  Odysseus  and  Diomed  in  the  Night-ex- 
cursion of  the  Tenth  Iliad.2  She  stupefies  and  bewilders 
the  Suitors  as  their  ruin  approaches  :  but  his  agent, 
Theoclumenos,3  announces,  and  he  therefore  may  be 
considered  as  supplying,  the  portents  which  beset  the 
Hall  of  the  Palace  before  the  final  catastrophe. 

Nagelsbach  observes,  that  the  power  of  signs  is  con- 
fined to  Zeus,  Here,  Apollo,  and  Pallas.4  But  the  signs 
exhibited  by  Here,  the-  thunder  of  the  Eleventh  Iliad, 
and  the  gift  of  speech  to  the  horses  of  Achilles,  involve 
no  knowledge  or  signification  of  the  future.  The  predic- 
tion delivered  by  the  horse  Xanthos  appears  to  be  his 
own,  and  not  the  gift  of  the  goddess. 

It  may  be  affirmed  generally,  that  both  these  deities, 
but  especially  Athene,  exercise  a  power  over  external 
nature  almost  without  limit.  Assuming  the  human 
form,  they  can  make  themselves  visible  to  one  person 
only  among  many.5  They,  and  none  but  they,  frame 
images  of  human  beings  which  can  speak  or  fight : 6 
Pallas  alters  at  will  the  figures  and  features  of  Odys- 
seus, Penelope,  and  Laertes ;  having  command,  ap- 

i  Od.  xv.  526.  2  ii.  x.  274. 

3  Od.  xx.  345-371.  4  Horn.  Theol.  iv.  16 ;  p.  147. 

•5  II.  i.  198,  and  (apparently),  xvii.  321-324. 

6  II.  v.  449.    Od.  iv.  796,  826. 


THE  DIYINITIES  OF  OLYMPOS.  285 

parently,  of  some  organic  power  over  matter  and  vital 
force.  While  Athene's  jurisdiction  as  to  storms  is  un- 
limited, Apollo  diverts  rivers  from  their  beds,  and 
makes  them  converge  upon  a  point.1  I 

In  like  manner  they  act  upon  the  mind  of  man  by 
infusing  fear,  courage,  counsel,  as  the  case  may  be. 
These  operations  are  never  assigned  to  any  deity  ex- 
cept those  of  the  first  order  in  Olympos. 

But  when  Poseidon  breathes  valor  into  the  two 
Ajaxes,  he  does  it  by  striking  them  ;  just  as  when  he 
has  to  convert  the  ship  of  the  Phaiakes  into  a  rock,  he 
drives  it  downward  with  a  blow  of  his  hand.2  On  the 
other  hand,  Apollo  infuses  courage  into  Hector  and 
Glaucos,  and  heals  also  the  wounds  of  the  latter  chief- 
tain,3 without  any  outward  act.  Most  of  the  corporal 
changes  effected  by  Athene  in  the  Odyssey  are  sim- 
ilarly brought  about.  Only  in  the  case  where  she 
effects  a  total  transformation  of  Odysseus,  she  touches 
him  with  her  wand.4 

This  exception,  as  a  rule,  from  the  use  of  instru- 
ments in  giving  effect  to  their  will,  is  a  sign  of  a  high 
conception,  on  the  part  of  the  Poet,  with  respect  to 
their  divine  power.  In  the  Kestos  of  Aphrodite,  in 
the  wand  of  Hermes,  an  intrinsic  virtue  resides,  apart 
from  the  will  of  those  personages  respectively.  These 
are  not  mere  symbols :  they  are  causative  seats  of 
power.  That  Apollo  and  Athene  do  not  use  any  such 
vehicle,  is  a  sign  of  force,  essential,  independent,  and 
supreme,  over  matter. 

Yet  once  more,  as  to  the  common  features  of  these 
extraordinary  personages. 

i  II.  xii.  24. 
3  II.  xvi.  528. 


2  II.  xiii.  59.    Od.  xiii.  164. 
4  Od.  xiii.  429 ;  xvi.  172,  456. 


286 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


Their  moral  standard  is  conspicuously  raised  above 
that  of  the  Olympian  family  in  general. 

Athene  has  the  purity  of  Artemis,  whom  in  all  other 
points  she  eclipses.  This  prerogative  is  expressly 
acknowledged  in  the  ancient  Hymn  to  Aphrodite.1 
No  such  statement  can  be  made  of  any  other  among 
the  active  goddesses  :  not  of  Here,  Thetis,  or  Hemeter  ; 
much  less  of  Aphrodite  herself. 

So  we  have  in  the  Poems  sons  of  Zeus,  of  Poseidon, 
of  Ares,  of  Hermes ;  all  of  them  the  fruit  of  their 
intrigues  with  women  ;  but  no  son  of  Apollo.  Hephais- 
tos,  indeed,  is  exempt  from  the  charge,  probably  on 
account  of  his  personal  deformity.  Down  to  the  time 
of  JEschylus,2  Apollo  retained  the  epithet  of  '  the 
pure.'  Later  still,  it  had  been  lost ; 3  and  the  legend 
of  Marpessa,  which  by  no  means  requires  such  a  con- 
struction in  Homer,  had  been  read  in  the  light  of  the 
later  tradition,  and  had  descended  to  the  common 
level.  His  share  in  the  scene  described  by  the  Lay  of 
Demodocos  may  perhaps  be  accounted  for  by  the  fact 
that  the  subject  belonged  to  a  foreign  theology,  though 
it  may  have  been  one  which  was  already  beginning  to 
act  upon  Greece. 

I  do  not  however  attach  to  the  term  '  purity,'  in  an 
inquiry  of  this  nature,  its  full  Christian  sense ;  in 
which  it  appears  as  one  portion  of  the  panoply  of  a 
complete  and  almost  seraphic  virtue,  and  is  elevated 
as  well  as  sustained  by  the  spirit  of  the  marvellous 
religion  to  which  it  belongs.  The  moral  characters  of 
Apollo  and  Athene  are  lofty,  if  measured  by  the  Olym- 
pian standard,  although  they  will  not  bear  the  tests 


1  vv.  8,  18. 


2  Suppl.  222. 


3  S.  Clem.  Alex.  p.  20,  B. 


THE  DIVINITIES  OF  OLYMPOS. 


287 


which  the  Christian  system  would  apply.  Apollo  de- 
scends from  his  height,  in  the  scene  where  he  strikes 
Patroclos  from  behind,  and  knocks  his  armor  off,  so  as 
to  bring  the  Greek  hero  into  that  unequal  position  in 
which  even  the  keen  national  feeling  of  the  Poet 
would  allow  him  to  be  conquered  by  a  Trojan.  And 
Pallas  undertakes  a  mean  office  when  she  incites  Pan- 
daros  to  a  breach  of  the  Pact.  Counsel,  with  her, 
certainly  degenerates  at  times  into  craft  and  fraud.1 
But  these  drawbacks  are  in  both  cases  exceptional. 
Speaking  generally,  the  two  are  beautiful  and  majestic 
delineations ;  and  Athen£  in  particular  has  many  of 
the  characteristics  of  the  Eternal  Wisdom,  which  came 
forth  from  the  bosom  of  God. 

The  distinctive  functions  of  Apollo,  which  sever  him 
from  Athene,  are  many.  The  highest  are  these  four: 
that  he  is  familiarly  employed  by  Zeus,  with  whom  he 
has  a  perfect  conformity  of  will,  as  his  agent  in  the 
government  of  human  affairs  ;  that  he  is  the  champion 
of  Zeus  and  of  Heaven  against  the  rebellious  powers  ; 
that  he  is  the  minister  of  death  ;  and,  finally,  that  to 
him  alone  there  seems  to  be  committed  an  absolute 
knowledge  of  the  future,  and  the  administration  of 
that  prophetic  gift  which  Calchas,  though  acting  in  and 
for  the  Greek  army,  held  from  him.2  Athene,  on  the 
other  hand,  is  occasionally  the  agent  of  Zeus,  with 
whose  will,  however,  she  is  less  uniformly  associated.3 
Apollo  has  also,  besides  the  gifts  of  the  bow,  of  healing, 
and  of  song,  a  special  association  with  the  light. 

The  ministry  of  death,  exercised  by  Apollo  for  men 
as  by  Artemis  for  women,  is  most  of  all  remarkable 


,1  II.  iv.  86-92.  Od.  xiii.  299. 
8  II.  iv.  70.    Od.  xxiy.  539-545. 


2  II.  i.  72. 


288 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


on  account  of  its  twofold  aspect.  It  is  sometimes 
penal,  as  with  Ariadne  ;x  or  even  a  terrible  vengeance, 
as  with  the  children  of  Niobe\2  It  is  sometimes  a  tran- 
quil and  painless  deliverance  from  the  burden  of  the 
flesh,  as  in  the  island  of  Surie.3  Another  peculiarity 
of  this  prerogative  is,  that  it  refers  to  death  produced 
without  second  causes.  All  other  deaths  whatever  in 
the  Poems,  natural  or  violent,  appear  to  be  referred  to 
second  causes.  There  is  a  mythological  impersonation 
of  Death  (Thanatos)  provided  by  the  Poet,  to  which  to 
refer  them.  The  death  brought  about  by  Apollo  and 
Artemis  is  an  exceptional  death,  in  the  point  of  being 
directly  due  to  their  supreme  will  and  special  ministry. 

And  this  is  at  least  a  wonderful  phenomenon  in  the 
Olympian  system,  especially  when  we  consider  how 
gloomy  and  repulsive,  in  the  view  of  Homer  and  his 
age,  was  the  extinction  of  our  mortal  life,  and  the 
prospect  of  the  region  that  lay  beyond  it.  Here  is,  as 
matter  of  fact,  a  tradition  of  a  Power  that  was  to  take 
away  the  sting  from  Death,  preserved  for  the  time,  but 
for  the  time  only,  among  a  people  who  surrounded 
death  in  general  with  associations  of  a  wholly  different 
character.  Even  if  it  stood  alone,  we  should  be  driven 
surely  to  treat  it  as  derived,  through  whatever  channel, 
from  some  ancient  and  signal  promise  of  a  Deliverer 
for  the  human  race.  It  does  not  however  stand  alone, 
but  forms  part  of  a  multitude  of  varied  testimonies, 
all  converging  upon  the  same  point. 

Athene,  besides  her  great  special  prerogatives  of 
War,  Policy,  and  Industrial  Art,  is  invested  generally 
with  yet  greater  power  than  Apollo,  and  rises  to  a  still 


i  Od.  xi.  324. 


2  II.  xxir.  606 ;  cf.  vi.  205. 


3  Od.  xv.  407. 


THE  DIVINITIES  OF  OLYMPOS. 


289 


higher  grade  of  moral  majesty.  She  seems  also,  by 
virtue  of  a  latent  partnership  in  the  divine  supremacy, 
to  partake  of  or  represent  something  analogous  to  sev- 
eral of  his  peculiar  gifts.  She  enters  into  his  knowl- 
edge of  the  future  ;  for  in  the  Ithacan  cave  she  foretells 
to  Odysseus  all  that  he  has  yet  to  suffer.1  And  if  he 
is  the  champion  of  the  gods  in  Olympos  (an  office 
which  she  shared  with  him  in  the  later  tradition),  she, 
as  I  have  above  observed,  possesses  a  jurisdiction  in 
the  Underworld,2  which  appears  to  cross  and  over-ride 
that  of  its  appointed  rulers.  Though  she  cannot  avert 
death  from  a  mortal,  she  can  afterwards  extricate  him 
from  its  grasp.3 

The  limits  of  this  work  forbid  me  to  pursue  the  my- 
thological history  of  Athene  and  Apollo  through  the 
later  literature  of  the  Greeks  and  Romans.  They  con- 
tinue, it  may  be  said  generally,  to  hold  positions  of 
great  splendor,  but  the  distinctive  character  of  their 
features  as  a  whole  is  gradually  enfeebled  and  effaced. 

Even  the  hasty  reader  of  Homer  cannot  fail  to  be 
struck  with  it ;  but  it  is  only  by  a  minute  and  careful 
observation  of  particulars  that  the  whole  case  can  be 
brought  out.  It  then  becomes  fully  manifest  that,  by 
not  one,  but  a  crowd  of  attributes  and  incidents,  they 
are  severed  from  the  general  body  of  the  Olympian 
deities  of  Homer,  and  closely  associated  together, 
though  very  far  from  being  even  substantially  identified, 
far  less  confused.  These  attributes  are  partly  intel- 
lectual, partly  moral.  The  general  result  is  to  render 
their  position  grossly  anomalous  and  wholly  inexpli- 
cable, if  the  explanation  of  it  is  only  to  be  sought  in 

1  Od.  xiii.  306.  2  II.  viii.  362-369.    Od.  iv.  750-753. 

3  Od.  iv.  752,  753. 

19 


290 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


the  laws  of  the  Olympian  system,  or  in  such  traditions 
as  the  older  nature-worship,  or  the  Egyptian,  or  Syrian, 
or  Phoenician  mythologies  could  supply. 

But  when  we  turn  to  the  Hebrew  annals,  we  find 
there  a  group  of  traditions,  belonging  to  what  may  be 
termed  the  Messianic  order,  which  appear  to  supply  us 
with  a  key  to  the  double  enigma.  The  general  char- 
acteristics of  the  Messianic  anticipations  are  in  marked 
conformity  with  the  common  prerogatives  of  Pallas  and 
Apollo.  And  the  distinctions  of  the  two  deities  fall  in, 
not  less  clearly,  with  the  twofold  form  in  which  those 
anticipations .  are  presented  to  us  ;  the  one,  which 
pointed  to  a  conception  more  abstract,  and  less  capable 
of  being  confounded  with  mere  humanity  ;  the  other, 
to  a  form  strictly  personal,  and  intimately  associated 
with  our  nature. 

In  these  resemblances,  there  appears  to  be  found 
a  very  strong  presumption,  that  the  Hellenic  portion 
of  the  Aryan  family  had  for  a  time  preserved  to  itself, 
in  broad  outline,  no  small  share  of  those  treasures,  of 
which  the  Semitic  family  of  Abraham  were  to  be  the 
appointed  guardians,  on  behalf  of  all  mankind,  until 
the  fulness  of  time  should  come. 

It  is  obvious  that  such  traditions,  when  cut  off  from 
their  fountain-head,  supplied  a  material  basis  for  that 
anthropomorphic  character  which  distinguished  the 
Greek  religion  from  first  to  last,  and  associated  it  so 
closely  with  the  whole  detail  of  life.  For,  according  to 
their  tenor,  the  conception  and  representation  of  deity 
in  human  form  were  no  idle  fancy,  but  were  the  great 
design  of  the  Almighty  God  for  the  recovery  of  an 
erring,  suffering,  and  distracted  race. 

On  the  importance  of  these  propositions  I  need  not 


THE  DIVINITIES  OF  OLYMPOS. 


291 


dwell.  The  more  they  are  important,  the  more  it  is  to 
be  desired  that  they  should  be  strictly  noted.  The 
intention  of  these  pages  is  both  to  invite,  and  some- 
what to  assist,  all  such  as  shall  be  disposed  to  under- 
take the  pains  of  such  an  investigation. 

Section  IX.  Hephaistos. 

Hephaistos  bears  in  Homer  the  double  stamp  of  a 
Nature-Power,  representing  the  element  of  fire,  and  of 
an  anthropomorphic  deity,  who  is  the  god  of  Art,  at 
a  period  when  the  only  fine  art  known  was  in  works 
of  metal  produced  by  the  aid  of  fire. 

As  Homer  gives  us  faint  traces  of  the  elemental  god 
of  air  in  endios,  and  as  his  Nereus  is  still  repre- 
sented in  the  nero  of  modern  Greek  for  '  water,'  so 
he  actually  employs  the  name  Hephaistos  in  one  pas- 
sage undeniably  for  fire,1  if  he  does  not  also  mean 
the  flame  of  fire  in  other  passages  where  he  mentions 
4  the  flame  of  Hephaistos.'  This  deity  is  worshipped 
in  Troas,  where  he  has  a  wealthy  priest.2 

Halm  finds  in  the  fouki-a  of  the  Albanian  tongue, 
signifying  force,  the  root  of  the  word  Vulcan  us;3 
and  quotes  Varro,  'ab  ignis  vi  et  violentia  Vul- 
can us  est  diet  us.'  Schmidt  connects  the  name 
with  fulgere  and  fulmen.4 

Hephaistos  is  not  one  of  the  seven  astral  deities  of 
the  East,  who  stood  in  relation  to  seven  metals. 

It  is  doubtless  in  a  double  or  plural  tradition  that 
we  are  to  seek  the  explanation  of  our  finding  Hephais- 
tos, on  the  one  hand,  bearing  the  marks  of  antiquity 

i  II.  ii.  426.  2  ii.  v.  9.  3  Alban.  Studien,  p.  252.  ~ 

4  Beckniann,  Inventions,  Art.  Metals. 


292 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


which  belong  to  a  Nature-Power,  and,  on  the  other 
hand,  made  known  to  us  as  an  infant,  the  offspring  of 
Zeus  and  Herd,  whose  mother  sought  to  hide  him,  that 
is  to  put  him  out  of  the  way,  on  account  of  his  lame- 
ness :  a  sure  sign  that,  in  the  view  of  Homer,  he  was, 
so  far  as  regards  his  higher  character  of  Art-master, 
a  deity  of  more  recent  introduction.  This  part  of  the 
traditions  can  relate  to  no  mere  fire-god.  He  is  saved 
by  Thetis,  the  grand  mediatress  of  the  Theogonies,  and 
Eurunome,  the  daughter  of  Okeanos  ;  and  hid  by  them 
in  a  submarine  cavern,  where,  with  the  tidal  flood  of 
ocean  ever  gurgling  in  his  ears,  he  spends  his  time  for 
nine  years  in  working  clasps,  and  necklaces,  and  other 
trinkets.1  Such  an  assemblage  of  images  is  highly 
Phoenician,  that  is  to  say  Eastern,  in  its  color. 

The  combination  in  this  place  of  Thetis,  a  sea-god- 
dess, and  the  ocean-deity,  is  remarkable  ;  and  stands, 
I  think,  alone  in  Homer.  I  understand  it  to  betoken 
the  dual  course  of  tradition  relating  to  Hephaistos. 
The  Okeanos  of  Homer  is  the  sire  of  gods,  or  their 
source.2  This  may  indeed  relate  to  the  Nature-Pow- 
ers, rather  than  to  the  Olympian  gods,  from  whom 
Okeanos  stands  somewhat  widely  apart.  If  so,  Euru- 
nome has  her  share  in  the  transaction  as  a  representa- 
tive of  the  older  dynasty  of  gods,  and  Thetis  as  a 
personage  who  has  the  entree  to  the  newer  circle.  But 
it  seems  more  probable  that  as  Okeanos,  the  father  of 
Perse,  and  father-in-law  of  Helios,  has  strong  East- 
ern associations,  Eurunome  represents  the  newer  and 
higher  character  of  Hephaistos  imported  from  the  East, 
and  that  Thetis,  according  to  her  own  stock,  befriends 
him  as  a  Nature-Power. 

i  II.  xviii.  394-405.  2  II.  xiv.  201. 


THE  DIVINITIES  OF  OLYMPOS. 


293 


Both  the  water  of  Ocean,  and  the  connection  of  fire 
with  fine  art  in  metals,  probably  attach  Hephaistos  to 
the  channels  of  Phoenician,  in  its  widest  sense  of 
Eastern,  tradition :  while  he  may  have  represented 
the  simple  element  of  fire  in  the  Pelasgian  systems 
of  religion. 

The  latter  relation  accounts  for  his  being  worshipped 
in  Troas,  even  while  he  is  one  of  the  deities  who,  fol- 
lowing his  chief  bent,  takes  decidedly,  though  not 
passionately,  the  Greek  part  in  the  quarrel.  And, 
accordingly,  it  is  under  the  rude  conception  of  mere 
fire  that  he  is  matched,  in  the  Theomachy,  with  the 
river  Xanthos,  whom  he  exhausts  by  drying  up  the 
stream,  and  thus  sorely  afflicts,  until  Here  inter- 
cedes. 

Through  all  his  other  marked  operations  in  the 
Poems,  Hephaistos,  instead  of  resolving  himself  into 
the  element,  remains  entirely  anthropomorphic,  al- 
though he  is  so  far  from  satisfying  the  Greek  ideal 
of  a  god  in  respect  of  form.  He  is  such  in  the  Olym- 
pian banquet  at  the  close  of  the  first  Book,  at  the  smithy 
or  forge  in  his  own  palace,  and  again  in  the  lay  of 
Demodocos. 

Married  to  Aphrodite  in  the  Odyssey,  he  appears  in 
the  Iliad  as  the  husband  of  Charis.1  Now  Aphrodite 
is  a  real  member  of  the  mythological  system,  whereas 
Charis  is  loosely  and  faintly  delineated,  and  seems 
almost  to  hover  between  an  idea  and  a  person.  Some 
have  treated  these  two  representations  as  discrepant, 
and  have  used  them  in  support  of  the  theory,  which 
separates  the  authorship  of  the  two  Poems.  Others 
(myself  included)  may  have  suggested  modes  of  re- 

1  Od.  viii.  269  ;  II.  xviii.  382. 


294 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


conciliation  between  them,  which  are  insufficient.1 
Having  now  arrived,  I  think,  at  adequate  proof  of  the 
Eastern  or  Phoenician  character  of  the  mythology,  as 
well  as  the  scenery,  of  the  whole  sphere  of  the  Voy- 
ages, I  find  in  this  fact  the  simplest  explanation  of  a 
difference,  which,  instead  of  any  longer  impeaching, 
rather  tends  to  sustain  the  unity  of  authorship.  He- 
phaistos  and  Aphrodite,  as  husband  and  wife,  owe  that 
relation  probably  to  a  Syrian  or  Syro-Phoenician  source. 
Hephaistos  and  Charis,  in  the  sense  of  the  Hellenic 
mythology,  together  represent,  with  a  perfect  pro- 
priety, the  strength  and  the  grace,  the  beauty  or 
charm,  which  require  to  be  combined  in  works  of 
Art.  Nagelsbach,  accordingly,  treats  this  marriage 
as  allegorical.2 

The  Poems,  however,  establish  a  relation,  be  it  al- 
legorical or  not,  between  the  Charites  and  Aphrodite  ; 
for  the  Charites  receive  her  on  her  return  from  the 
scene  of  the  Net  to  Cyprus,  where  they  bathe,  anoint, 
and  vest  her.  One  junior  of  their  band,  promised  by 
Her£  as  a  wife  to  Hupnos,  or  the  god  of  sleep,  in 
Lemnos,is  named  Pasithee.  Two  handmaids  of  Nausi- 
caa  in  Scherie.  draw  their  beauty  from  the  Charites. 
There  is  therefore  some  evidence  to  give  them  a  per- 
sonality beyond  that  which  the  single  mind  of  the  Poet 
can  confer.  Their  relation  to  Eastern  personages  sug- 
gests that  they  may  have  had  a  place  in  Eastern  tradi- 
tion ;  while  it  seems  that  they  acquired  with  time  a 
recognized  character  and  worship  in  Greece.3  Profes- 
sor Max  Miiller  derives  their  name,  as  well  as  that  of 


1  Studies,  vol.  ii.  p.  257.  2  Horn.  Theol.  p.  114. 

3  Welcker,  vol.  i.  p.  696.    Dr.  Schmidt  in  Smith's  Diet.  sub.  voc. 


THE  DIVINITIES  OF  OLYMPOS. 


295 


the  Harits  or  Horses  of  the  Sun,  from  the  Sanscrit 
root  ghar,  to  glitter,  to  render  brilliant  by  oil.1 

The  deity  of  Hephaistos  is  matchless  within  the 
sphere  of  his  own  art.  It  is  in  concert  with  Athene^, 
that  he  grants  to  mortals  the  gift  of  manual  skill ; 2 
but  his  own  works  are  the  most  wonderful  recorded  of 
any  god.  In  addition  to  every  charm  of  grace  and 
splendor,  they  have  the  actual  gift  of  life.  In  Olympos, 
the  metal  handmaids  of  the  limping  god  both  think 
and  speak ; 3  and  in  Scherie,  the  porter-dogs  of  Alki- 
noos4  have  perpetual  existence,  and  perpetual  youth. 
Even  in  the  inanimate  Shield  there  are  varied  signs  of 
life.5  A  certain  kindliness  of  nature  marks  the  inter- 
vention of  Hephaistos,  in  the  first  Book,  to  stop  a 
quarrel 6  between  his  parents ;  and  that  he  was  en- 
dowed with  warm  affections  is  evident  from  the  recital 
he  there  gives  of  a  former  effort  made  by  him  to  save 
Here  from  the  wrath  of  Zeus,  which  entailed  on  him  a 
fall  from  heaven  to  earth,7  as  well  as  from  the  warm 
gratitude 8  he  displays  towards  Thetis  for  the  benefit 
she  had  conferred  on  him.  His  conduct  respecting 
Here  is  the  more  praiseworthy,  in  proportion  as  her 
attempt  upon  his  deformed  infancy  had  been  unnatu- 
ral.9 In  the  lay  of  the  Net,  under  the  heaviest  provo- 
cation his  conduct  is  not  vindictive. 

Hephaistos  is  the  architect  of  the  palaces  of  the  gods,10 
as  well  as  the  artificer  of  the  most  conspicuous  works  of 
Art  mentioned  in  the  Poems.11    He  made  a  lock  for 

1  Lectures  on  Language,  ii.  373,  375. 

2  Od.  vi.  233  ;  xxiii.  160.  3  n.  xviii.  417. 
4  Od.  vii.  91-94.       5  Znfra,  Chap.  XIII.          6  n.  i.  571-589. 

7  II.  i.  590-594.        8  ii.  xviii.  395.  9  n.  xviii.  395-397. 

w  II.  i.  607  ;  xiv.  167,  338.  u  II.  viii.  195 ;  Od.  iv.  617. 


296 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


Here;  which  not  only  no  man,  but  no  god  could  open.1 
Lemnos  appears  to  be  his  chosen  abode,  as  a  volcanic 
isle  :  of  other  similar  islands  or  spots,  in  the  later 
mythology,  we  find  the  like  recorded. 

Out  of  his  own  art,  he  carries  no  signs  of  divinity  in 
Homer ;  he  does  not  act  on  general  nature,  or  on  the 
human  mind,  unless  in  a  case  where  the  sons  of  his 
own  Priest  are  concerned  ;  and  these  he  merely  conceals 
in  a  cloud  of  vapor,  a  power  which  even  Aphrodite  seems 
to  exercise  on  behalf  of  the  body  of  Hector.  His  powers 
of  perception  are  so  limited,  that,  in  the  lay  of  Demo- 
docos,  he  is  ignorant  of  what  takes  place,  during  his 
absence,  in  his  own  house,  until  the  Sun  informs  him, 
whom  he  again  employs  as  a  spy  ;  nor,  in  the  Twenty- 
first  Book  of  the  Iliad,  is  he  aware  of  the  danger  in  which 
Achilles  stands  from  the  united  Rivers,  until  Here  in- 
forms him,  and  bids  him  act.2 

Section  X.  Ares. 

The  Ar£s  of  Homer,  like  his  Poseidon,  exhibits  that 
idea  of  deity  which  both  rises  above  man,  and  sinks 
much  below  him :  in  point  of  strength  divine,  in  point 
of  mind  and  heart  simply  animal.  He  is  a  compound 
of  deity  and  brute. 

But  Ares  is  greatly  inferior  to  Poseidon  in  that  class 
of  conceptions,  to  which  both,  in  a  marked  manner  be- 
long. Glory  and  awe  surround  the  one,  from  his  unfail- 
ing might,  and  his  high  origin.  Ares  represents  a  huge 
mass  of  animal  force  ;  but  he  is  so  exhibited  in  the 
action  of  the  Iliad,  as  to  fall  into  much  of  the  contempt 


i  II.  xiv.  167,  8. 


2  II.  xxi.  328  333. 


THE  DIVINITIES  OF  OLTMPOS. 


297 


(in  a  certain  sense)  which  is  evidently  meant  to  attach 
to  Aphrodite. 

It  seems  safe  to  assume  that  a  god,  and  more  espe- 
cially a  god  of  war,  whom  Homer  represents  as  wounded 
and  disabled  by  a  Greek  warrior,  could  not,  in  the  time 
of  Homer,  have  been  a  deity  of  acknowledged  worship 
and  renown  in  Greece.  Nor  is  there  found  in  the  Poems 
any  trace  of  such  worship.  No  prayer  or  sacrifice  is 
offered  to  him :  he  has  no  general  command  over  the 
mind  of  man,  or  over  external  nature.  It  is  said,  in- 
deed, that  he  entered  into  Hector  while  that  chieftain 
was  engaged  in  putting  on  the  armor  of  Achilles  ; 1  but 
this  appears  to  treat  him  simply  as  a  passion,  just  as  in 
other  places  his  name  becomes  a  synonym  for  war,  or  for 
a  spear.  None  of  the  five  great  gods  of  the  Poems  are 
ever  said  thus  to  enter  into  (as  if  it  were  to  be  contained 
in  and  circumscribed  by)  the  spirit  of  a  man;  the  highest 
divine  agents  effuse,  so  to  speak,  and  inspire  a  temper, 
but  do  not  impart  themselves.  He  has,  however,  a 
special  relation  to  the  martial  spirit,  which  he  stirs  in 
Menelaos,2  and  which  he  confers  as  a  gift  in  the  Odyssey 
upon  the  Pseudodysseus  ;  but  only  in  conjunction  with 
Athene.3  This  may  be  taken,  however,  as  a  sign  that 
he  was  known  to  some  extent  within  Greece  ;  in  Crete, 
for  example.  In  Greece,  too,  he  is  the  father  of  Ascal- 
aphos  and  Ialmenos;4  and  the  wall  of  Thebes  is  the 
teichos  Areion.5  Liinemann6  observes,  that  Ares 
represents  the  idea  of  raw  courage.  He  does  not  rep- 
resent courage  as  Homer  conceived  it.  He  has  no 
skill,  resource,  or  even  perseverance  in  war,  whether 
against  Athene  or  against  Diomed ;  but  rather  a  stupid 


i  H.  xvii.  210. 
4  II.  ii.  512. 


2  II.  v.  563. 
s  II.  iv.  407. 


3  Od.  xiv.  199,  216. 
6  Worterbuch  in  voc. 


298 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


insensibility,  which  rushes  on  the  spear's  point.1  And, 
when  he  has  felt  it,  he  flies  off,  and  howls  under  the 
pain :  two  operations  never  (I  think)  permitted  by 
Homer  to  a  wounded  Greek ;  perhaps  not  even  to  a 
wounded  Trojan.  He  groans  again  after  his  discom- 
fiture by  Athene  in  the  Theomachy.2 

In  battle  with  the  Solumoi,Ares  is  said  to  slay  Isan- 
dros,  the  son  of  Bellerophon.  This  may  mean  no  more 
than  that  Isandros  fell  in  the  war.3 

Eepresented  as  dwelling  in  Olympos,  he  is  unaware 
of  what  has  taken  place  on  the  battle-fields  of  Troas ; 
he  learns  by  accident  the  death  of  his  son  Ascalaphos ; 
and  when  rushing  forth  to  avenge  it,  he  is  arrested  by 
Pallas,  who  strips  off  his  armor,  scolds  him  sharply, 
and  replaces  him  in  his  seat.4  She  habitually,  indeed, 
to  use  our  homely  phrase,  bullies  him.5 

Thus  inferior  in  action  to  Athene,  he  only  divides 
with  her  the  prerogative  of  presiding  over  war.  On 
the  Shield  of  Achilles,  the  two. are  represented6  as  the 
patrons  respectively  of  the  two  opposing  hosts  ;  and  in 
a  variety  of  passages7  besides  that  already  referred  to, 
their  common,  or  rather  rival,  possession  of  this  field  of 
action  is  exhibited.  For  example,  in  the  Twentieth 
Iliad,8  while  Athene  shouts  to  urge  on  the  Greeks, 
Ares  does  the  like  for  the  Trojans. 

In  the  Fifth  Iliad,9  he  envelops  the  fight  in  darkness: 
but,  as  if  to  account  for  so  powerful  an  operation  by  a 
deity  of  his  secondary  rank,  the  Poet  goes  on  to  say 
that  he  was  fulfilling  the  orders  of  Apollo,  who  had 
bid  him  incite  the  Trojans. 

i  II.  v.  849-863.  2  ii.  xxi.  417.  3  n.  vi.  203. 

4  II.  xv.  110-142.  &  II.  v.  766.  6  II.  xviii.  516. 

1  II.  r.  430,  xvii.  398,  xx.  358.  8  48-53. 
9  505-511. 


THE  DIVINITIES  OF  OLYMPOS. 


299 


He  was  overcome  and  bound  by  the  youths  Otos  and 
Ephialtes  (whom  Apollo  conquered)  ;  and  he  would 
have  perished  in  his  bonds,  had  not  Hermes  released 
him,  after  an  imprisonment  of  thirteen  months.1  Im- 
mortal he  is;2  but,  it  appears,  only  just  immortal. 

He  is  thirsty,  not  of  sacrifices  in  the  ordinary  way, 
but  of  human  blood.3  According  to  Ammianus,4  the 
Thracians  of  history  propitiated  him  by  sacrificing  the 
lives  of  prisoners. 

So  limited  are  his  perceptions,  that  Pallas,  by  putting 
on  a  particular  helmet,  can  prevent  his  recognizing  her.5 

His  flesh  is  tender,  like  that  of  all  the  gods  :  but  he 
is  described  principally  by  bulk  and  mass.6  When 
AthenS  smites  him  to  the  ground,  he  extends  over 
nine  pel et lira,  or  about  seven  hundred  feet,7  in 
length. . 

On  escaping  from  the  net,  in  the  Eighth  Odyssey,  he 
repairs  to  Thrace.  From  thence,  with  his  ideal  son 
Terror,  he  comes  forth  to  make  war  upon  the  Ephuroi 
(a  race  whom  their  name  appears  to  associate  with  the 
Greeks),  or  with  the  Phleguai.  In  Thrace  clearly  was 
his  home.  Thrace  appears  to  have  been  known  by  the 
name  of  Aria.8  Berkel  connects  the  two  names  to- 
gether. 

If,  on  the  one  hand,  ArSs  was  not  fully  established 
as  an  Hellenic  deity,  still  he  is  a  son  of  Here,  in  the 
Olympian  family,  and  there  is  a  lack  of  special  links 
between  him  and  the  Trojans.  It  appears  that  he 
wavered  between  the  two  parties  :  nay,  even  that  he 

i  II.  v.  385-391.  2  ib.  901.  3  Ib.  289. 

4  xxvii.  4.  5  II.  v.  845. 

6  II.  ii.  479  ;  vii.  208 ;  viii.  349.  7  n.  xxi,  497. 

8  Steph.  Byzant.  in  voc.  Thrake. 


300 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


had  promised  to  take  part  with  the  Greeks,  and  had 
then  changed  his  mind.  He  is  accordingly  called  turn- 
coat (alloprosallos),1  and  is  a  special  object  of  the 
wrath  of  Here,  who  makes  known  in  Olympos  the 
death  of  his  son  Ascalaphos,2  with  the  hope  that  he  may 
avenge  it  on  the  Trojans,  and  so  change  sides  again. 
This  he  is  evidently  about  to  do,  in  despite  of  the  pro- 
hibition of  Zeus,  when  Pallas  stops  him,  lest  more 
trouble  should  arise  from  the  wrath  of  the  Sire.  When 
he  suffers  defeat  in  the  Theomachy,  Pallas  tells  him 
it  is  because  the  Erinues  of  his  mother  Her£  pursue 
him.3  The  whole  nation  of  the  Thrakes,  however 
(as  we  now  understand  Thrace),  with  whom  he  is 
specially  associated,  are  among  the  allies  of  Troy  in 
the  War.4 

It  is  difficult,  from  the  materials  afforded  by  Homer, 
to  trace  the  god  Ar£s  up  to  his  origin.  But  his  promi- 
nent place  in  the  Italian  mythology  renders  it  probable, 
that  his  worship  may  have  prevailed  among  the  Pelas- 
gian  forerunners  of  the  Hellenic  race.  Welcker  thinks 
that  he  had  had  a  divine  cultus  at  an  early  date  among 
some  race  alien  to  the  Greek,  from  which  the  Hellenic 
gods  proper  displaced  him,  and  that  there  are  traces 
of  him  as  a  Nature-Power.5  Both  ideas  would  be  veri- 
fied if  he  could  be  tracked  to  a  Pelasgian  or  quasi-Pe- 
lasgian  source ;  and  this  too  would  give  a  propriety  to 
his  siding  with  Troy  ;  which,  however,  poetical  neces- 
sity went  far  towards  exacting,  in  order  to  give  even 
the  faintest  show  of  equality  to  the  Trojan  party  in 
Olympos. 

i  II.  v.  831  2  ii.  xv.  100-112.  3  Ii.  xxi.  412. 

4  II.  ii.  844-846.        5  Gr.  Gotterlehre,  i.  414. 


THE  DIVINITIES  OF  OLYMPOS. 


301 


Section  XI.  Hermes. 

The  part  played  by  Hermes  in  the  Iliad  is  secondary. 
His  only  important  manifestation  is  when,  in  the 
Twenty-fourth  Book,  he  appears  by  order  of  Zeus  to 
Priam,  under  the  semblance  of  a  young  prince ;  and 
attends  him,  with  amiable  care,  On  his  way  to  and  from 
the  scene  of  his  arduous  errand.  But  this  mission  is 
neither  political  nor  military.  It  is  only  social  and 
domestic.  It  is  eminently  illustrative  of  the  peculiar 
function  of  Hermes,  which  is,  to  be  the  god  of  expe- 
dients, resource,  and  help ;  the  accommodating  and 
genial  god.1  This  character  is  expressed  alike  in  his 
epithets,  such  as  eriounios2  and  akaketa,3  and  in  his 
conduct.  His  agency  is,  as  a  rule,  beneficial  to  those 
with  whom  he  deals :  hence  he  is  chosen  to  be  the 
guide  of  Priam  :  hence  he  assures  Calypso  that  he  has 
come  to  her  unwillingly  at  the  command  of  Zeus, 
cautiously  alleging,  however,  the  length  of  way  and 
want  of  provision  on  the  journey,  as  his  reasons.4  He 
is  the  person  employed  to  admonish  Aigisthos 5  not  to 
commit  the  meditated  crimes  :  a  warning,  which  aimed 
at  saving  him  from  vengeance. 

Hermes  is  the  son  of  Zeus  and  Maias.6  He  is  the 
giver  of  increase,  dotor  eaon:7  and  it  is  perhaps  in 
this  capacity  that  Eumaios,  the  swineherd,  consecrates 
to  him  a  seventh  portion,  at  the  meal-sacrifice  in  his 
hut,  on  the  arrival  of  Odysseus.8  Like  the  majority  of 
the  other  gods,  he  has  one  or  more  human  children 

1  II.  xxiv.  334.  2  Rare  helper. 

3  Never  harmful.  4  Od.  v.  99-102. 

5  Od.  i.  38.  6  Od.  viii.  335 ;  xiv.  435. 

i  Od.  viii.  335.  8  Qd.  xiv.  435. 


302 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


born  clandestinely : 1  but,  whenever  we  hear  of  him, 
it  is  as  the  giver  of  some  gift,  or  renderer  of  some 
service.  Yet  the  idea  of  concealment  inheres  in  his 
functions.  When  the  question  is  raised  in  Olympos 
as  to  delivering  the  body  of  Hector,  the  first  expedient 
is,  that  Hermes  should  steal  it.2  Again  he  steals  Ares 
out  of  his  confinement.3  His  prerogatives  however 
embrace  not  only  thievery,  but  also  perjury,  as  it  was 
he  who  conferred  both  these  gifts  on  Autolucos.4  Yet 
perhaps,  considering  his  general  character  of  usefulness 
without  hurt,  we  may  possibly  presume  that  these  ob- 
jectionable faculties  were  only  given  for  some  defensive 
or  beneficial  end.  In  Homer,  he  has  no  relation  to 
industry,  or  skill  in  manufacture :  these  belong  to 
Athene  and  Hephaistos.  But'  he  seems  to  be  the  agent 
or  envoy  of  the  Olympian  assembly :  and  his  office  as 
the  god  of  increase,  together  with  his  relation  to  pilfer- 
ing, place  him  in  connection  with  the  business  of  ex- 
change, at  a  period  when  commerce,  so  beneficial  in 
itself,  is  notwithstanding  a  near  neighbor  not  only  to 
fraud  on  the  one  hand,  but  to  violence  on  the  other. 

He  never  hates,  or  punishes,  or  quarrels,  or  is  in- 
censed with  any  one.  Nor  is  he  troubled  with  self- 
love.  Though  ranged  on  the  Greek  side  in  the  poem, 
and  in  the  Theomachy,  he  declines  the  contest  with 
Leto,  his  appointed  antagonist,  as  a  wife  of  Zeus,  too 
great  for  him  to  cope  with*:  and  tells  her  she  may  give 
out  that  she  has  worsted  him.5 

In  the  Fourth  Iliad,  Zeus  chooses  Athene^  for  the 
mission  to  Pandaros,  to  persuade  him  to  break  the 


i  n.  xvi.  181. 
4  Od.  xix.  396. 


2  II.  xxiv.  24. 
5  II.  xxi.  497-501. 


3  II.  v.  390. 


THE  DIVINITIES  OF  OLYMPOS. 


303 


covenanted  truce.1  This  office  would  have  seemed 
every  way  more  suitable  to  Hermes.  The  reason  that 
it  is  not  committed  to  him  may  probably  be,  that  he 
was  unknown  in  Troy.  In  the  Twenty-fourth  Book, 
he  describes  himself  to  Priam  as  a  Myrmidon  and  an 
esquire  of  Achilles,  nor  does  he  announce  himself  as 
a  god  until  it  becomes  necessary  that  he  should  depart, 
and  leave  the  old  King  alone  within  the  cantonment 
of  the  formidable  hero.  Priam  does  not  then  in  any 
manner  recognize  him  personally,  or  address  him  in  his 
divine  capacity. 

The  functions  discharged  by  Hermes  appear  to  point 
to  a  connection  with  the  Phoenicians,  as  the  great  mer- 
chants of  the  time.  The  name  of  his  mother  Maias 
is  not  connected  by  Homer  with  Phoenicia,  except  by 
the  negative  evidence  that,  like  Dione"  the  mother  of 
Aphrodite,  she  does  not  appear  in  the  list  of  the  attach- 
ments of  Zeus  given  in  the  Fourteenth  Iliad,  where  all 
the  intimacies  have  their  scene  laid  or  supposed  in 
Greece,  Greek  traditions  alone  appearing  to  be  admit- 
ted. In  the  Hymn  to  Hermes  the  gap  is  supplied,  and 
Maias  is  declared  to  be  the  daughter  of  Atlas,  who  is 
with  Homer  a  personage  entirely  Phoenician. 

Again,  Hermes  manifestly  has  a  personal  relation 
with  Calypso,2  who  welcomes  him  as  aldoiog  rs  epilog  re ; 3 
terms,  which  are  much  beyond  the  limit  of  ordinary 
courtesy  ;  which  are  employed  in  the  very  special  case 
of  Zeus  and  Thetis ; 4  and  which  Here"  flatters  herself 
she  shall  deserve  at  the  hands  of  Okeanqs  and  Tethus, 
provided  she  shall  succeed  in  bringing  them  together 
again.5    Calypso  was  the  daughter  of  Atlas :  and  it 


1  H.  iv.  69.  2  Od.  v.  88. 

4  II.  xxiv.  111.    Cf.  II.  xviii.  394. 


3  Bevered  and  loved. 
5  IL.  xiv.  210. 


304 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


is  probable  that  Maias  was  her  mythological  sister, 
and  Hermes  her  nephew.  We  have  another  sign  of 
the  ties  between  him  and  Calypso  in  this,  that  Odys- 
seus obtained  from  her  the  account  of  the  proceedings 
in  Olympos  about  the  oxen  of  the  Sun,  and  that  she 
had  had  it  from  Hermes.1  This  could  hardly  be  on 
any  other  footing  than  that  of  a  mythological  relation- 
ship, really  indicating  an  ethnical  affinity.  He  was  syste- 
matically worshipped  by  the  people  of  Scherid  before 
retiring  to  rest.2 

We  find  him  yet  again  employed,  within  the  circle 
of  the  Phoenician  traditions,3  to  instruct  Odysseus  as 
to  the  means,  by  which  he  may  safely  encounter  Kirke" 
and  her  enchantments.  I  again  use  the  word  Phoeni- 
cian as  including,  for  Homer,  what  was  Egyptian  or 
Eastern. 

Other  remarkable  incidents  are  recorded  of  him. 
It  was  he  who,  together  with  Athene,  conducted  He- 
racles in  safety,  with  the  formidable  dog,  out  of  Hades ; 4 
and  he  likewise  escorts  the  souls  of  the  Suitors  from 
Ithaca  to  the  Underworld.5  He,  moreover,  carried  to 
Pelops,  from  Zeus,  the  sceptre  which  Hephaistos  had 
wrought.6 

Hermes  is  an  agent  rather  than  a  mere  messenger  : 
and,  as  a  messenger,  he  is  pretty  clearly  distinguished 
in  this  vital  respect,  that  he  goes  not,  like  Iris,  upon 
the  personal  errand  of  Zeus  or  Her£,  but  he  carries  the 
collective  resolution  of  the  Olympian  Court.7  His 
general  office  is  best  represented  by  the  word  diactoros 
or  agent,  hers  by  angel os  or  messenger.  He  may  be 
called  the  god  of  intercourse. 

i  Od.  xiii.  390.  2  od.  vii.  137.  3  Od.  x.  275-307. 

4  Od.  xi.  623-626.        5  Od.  xxiv.  1-14.        6  n.  n  104. 
7  Od.  i.  38,  84.    Cf.  II.  xxiv.  24. 


THE  DIVINITIES  OP  OLYMPOS. 


305 


His  very  marked  name,  Argeiphontes,  is  nowhere 
explained  in  Homer  ;  or  in  Hesiod  ;  or  in  the  Homeric 
Hymn.  It  is  discussed  fully  by  Welcker:1  and  the 
constructions  put  upon  it  tend  to  connect  him  with 
the  East,  and  with  the  astronomic  worship.  In  the 
system  of  the  Persians,  as  stated  by  Origen,  the  seventh 
or  mixed  metal  is  assigned  to  him.2  The  first  verse  of 
the  Twenty-fourth  Odyssey  connects  him  with  Arcadia 
through  Cyllene.  Halm  finds  in  the  Albanian  lan- 
guage words  capable  (chermes,  tourme,)  of  relation 
to  his  name.  It  is  quite  possible  that  two  or  more 
streams  of  mythological  traditions  may  meet  in  him ; 
but  his  dominant  relations  are  evidently  Eastern. 

But  as  this  deity,  of  great  importance  and  highly 
diversified  attributes  in  the  later  mythology,  is  of  sec- 
ondary consequence  in  Homer,  I  pass  on. 

Section  XII.  Artemis. 

We  must  not  be  discouraged  if,  especially  in  the 
case  of  a  deity  of  the  second  order  like  Artemis,  we 
find  much  difficulty  in  discerning  the  precise  channel 
through  which  she  reached  her  actual  place  in  the 
Hellenic  mythology,  as  daughter  of  Leto,  and  sister 
of  Apollo,  with  the  other  attributes  attaching  to  her. 

On  the  whole,  however,  it  seems  that  there  is  much 
truth  in  the  observation  of  Miiller,  who  says  she  was 
worshipped  4  as  it  were  a  part  of  the  same  deity  ' 3 
with  Apollo.    She  is  in  the  main  a  reflection  of  her 

1  Gr.  Gotterlehre,  vol.  i.  pp.  336  seqq. 

2  Beckmann,  Hist,  of  Inventions,  Art.  '  Metals.' 

3  Muller's  Dorians,  vol.  ii.  ch.  9.  The  chapter  contains  much  in- 
formation on  the  worship  of  Artemis. 

20 


306 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


brother,  much  in  the  same  manner  as,  saving  the  sub- 
stitution (as  it  may  be  called)  of  the  sisterly  for  the 
conjugal  relation,  Her£  is  a  reflection  of  Zeus.  The 
relation  of  atmosphere  to  earth,  which  had  been  recog- 
nized outside  of  the  Olympian  scheme,  became,  under 
the  anthropomorphic  law  of  that  scheme,  the  relation 
of  King  and  Father  Zeus,  to  Queen  and  Mother  Here\ 
The  affinity  of  Sun  to  Moon,  acknowledged  already  as 
divinities  in  eastern,  and  probably  also  in  Pelasgian, 
systems  of  religion,  undergoing  a  like  transmutation, 
appears  in  the  Olympian  scheme  as  the  relation  of  the 
brother  Apollo  to  the  sister  Artemis.  For  we  have 
already  seen  the  reasons  for  supposing  that  in  Troy 
itself  the  Sun  was  worshipped  as  the  far-darting 
Apollo.  If  there  was  a  Sun-worship  there,  so  in  all 
likelihood  there  was  a  worship  of  the  Moon.  But 
Olympian  laws  seem  not  to  allow  an  acknowledgment 
in  the  action  of  the  Iliad  of  the  relation  between 
Apollo  and  the  Sun ;  nor,  by  parity  of  reasoning,  can 
they  recognize  any  relation  of  Artemis  to  the  Moon. 

That  such  a  relation  subsisted  out  of  Greece,  we 
may  readily  suppose.  The  traditions,  on  which  Homer 
had  to  employ  his  plastic  power,  varied  and  hetero- 
geneous, were  on  that  very  ground  the  more  elastic 
and  flexible,  partly  in  things,  but  especially  in  names. 
Identity  is  as  hard  to  follow  in  them,  as  it  is  easy  in 
human  life.  They  seem  to  form,  disform,  and  re-form 
before  us,  like  the  squares  of  colored  glass  in  the  ka- 
leidoscope as  it  is  turned  about  by  the  hand.  One 
group  of  these  traditions,  which  when  associated  com- 
pose a  nebula,  appears  before  us  in  severalty,  divided 
between  the  three  individualities  of  Artemis,  Perse- 
phone, and  Aphrodite.    Another  form  of  the  sever- 


THE  DIVINITIES  OF  OLYMPOS. 


307 


ance,  wholly  Greek  in  spirit,  comes  before  us  in  the 
double  tradition  of  the  celestial  and  the  earthly  or 
sensual  Aphrodite  ;  and  to  the  celestial  Aphrodite  the 
Artemis  of  Homer  bears  no  small  resemblance.  In- 
deed it  seems  likely  that,  as  Homer  found  or  shaped 
the  old  Earth-tradition  in  several  forms,  of  which  the 
portion  least  earthy,  and  most  sublimed,  became  his 
Here,  so  probably  there  may  have  lain  before  him  a 
variety  of  forms  of  the  tradition  of  the  Moon-goddess, 
in  association  with  highly  varied  ascriptions,  the  most 
ethereal  and  purest  part  of  which  took,  we  may  suppose, 
its  place  in  the  Olympian  system  as  his  Artemis. 

But  the  relations  of  wife  and  sister  respectively,  in 
which  Here  and  Artemis  are  placed,  are  probable  due 
to  the  anthropomorphic  principle,  and  to  that  method 
of  copying  for  heaven  the  things  seen  and  known  on 
earth,  according  to  which  the  Theo-mythology  of  Homer 
is  constructed.  And  the  remarkable  participation  of 
Artemis  in  the  high  prerogatives  of  Apollo  is  notably 
like  the  participation  of  Here  in  the  prerogatives  of 
Zeus.  In  this  participation,  this  greatness  by  reflec- 
tion, consists  principally  the  dignity  of  each  goddess. 
The  rude  material,  which  as  Nature-Powers  they  re- 
spectively offered  to  the  hand,  is  thus  lighted  up  with 
an  extraordinary  splendor. 

The  Homeric  signs  of  relation  between  Artemis  and 
the  Moon  are  of  the  same  kind  with  those  of  Apollo  to 
the  Sun  ;  but  fainter  in  proportion  to  smaller  energies, 
and  a  more  confined  activity.  The  terrible  clang  of 
the  arrows  of  Apollo  is  reflected  in  the  rattle  of  those 
of  Artemis.1    His  golden  sword  is  represented  in  her 


i  H.  i.  46  ;  xvi.  183. 


308 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


golden  distaff.1  She  is  also  golden- throned,  and  uses 
golden  reins.2  These  are  epithets  suitable  to  the 
moon. 

Halm  finds  no  root  for  the  name  Artemis  in  the  Al- 
banian tongue  ;  and  we  cannot  in  this  way  trace  it  to 
the  Pelasgian  religion.  But  in  '  Charnea,'  meaning 
the  moon,  he  detects  the  Anna  Perenna  of  the  Latins, 
of  whom  Ovid3  says, e  Sunt  quibus  ha'ec  luna  est ; ' 
and  likewise  the  Anath  or  Tanath  of  Egypt,  who  is 
taken  by  some  to  be  the  analogue  of  Artemis.4  On 
the  whole  we  seem  to  have  a  groundwork  in  the 
scheme  of  Nature-worship,  on  which  the  Homeric 
tradition  of  Artemis  is  built,  and  which  places  her  on 
the  Trojan  side. 

The  great  function  which  in  Homer  she  shares  with 
Apollo,  is  that  of  being  the  minister  of  Death,  in  the 
double  sense  of  a  deliverance  or  translation,  and  of 
an  infliction  penal  in  its  nature.  In  the  first  capacity, 
Penelope  asks  her  aid,  that  she  may  be  set  free  from 
the  persecutions  of  the  Suitors :  5  and  in  like  manner 
she  dismisses  from  life  the  women,  and  Apollo  the 
men,  of  the  happy  island  of  Suri£,  where  want  and 
sickness  are  unknown.6  But  she  likewise  slays  Ari- 
adne, for  her  lapse  from  chastity  in  Die  ; 7  and  avenges 
on  the  daughters  of  Niob£  (as  Apollo  does  on  the  sons) 
the  offence  of  their  mother.8  As  the  Huntress-queen, 
she  is  the  destroyer  of  life  in  animals,  and  perhaps  this 
office  was  committed  to  her  as  an  inferior  portion  of 
the  ministry  of  death,  more  suitably  placed  in  her 


i  II.  xx.  70.  2  II.  vi.  205 ;  ix.  533.  3  Fast.  iii.  657. 

4  Hahn.  Alban.  Stud.  pp.  250,  277.  5  Od.  xx.  61. 

6  Od.  xv.  407.         ?  Od.  xi.  324.  8  n.  xxiv.  604-609. 


THE  DIVINITIES  OF  OLYMPOS. 


309 


hands  than  in  those  of  her  brother  Apollo  ;  as  if  she 
had,  so  to  speak,  the  leavings  of  his  great  offices. 

The  inferiority,  indeed,  of  Artemis  to  Apollo  is 
very  strongly  marked  in  Homer,  although  the  relation 
of  Moon  to  Sun  was  most  suitably  represented  in  an  an- 
thropomorphic religion  by  placing  them  as  brother  and 
sister.  In  the  Fifth  Iliad,  when  Apollo  carries  iEueas 
to  Pergamos,  and  places  the  disabled  chief  in  his  own 
temple,  Leto  and  Artemis  are  found  there,1  to  nurse 
and  restore  him  ;  not  in  any  shrine  of  their  own,  nor 
in  one  common  to  the  family.  And  again  in  the  Theo- 
machy,  Artemis,  contending  with  Her£,  is  subjected  to 
sad  indignity,  and  actually  whipped  with  her  own  bow 
and  arrows.2  She  is  here  treated  with  none  of  the 
special  respect  that  is  given,  not  only  to  Apollo  and 
Athen£,  but  to  Leto.  This  convinces  me  on  further 
reflection3  that  her  Olympian  relation  to  Apollo  is 
more  probably  based  upon  physical  facts,  than  upon 
participation  in  the  higher  traditions. 

Her  agency,  however,  is  ubiquitous  ;  perhaps  in  vir- 
tue of  facts  belonging  to  the  same  order  ;  yet  it  would 
be  singular,  if  her  worship  obtained  among  Hellenes 
earlier  than  that  of  the  Sun.  So,  however,  it  seems  to 
have  been.  A  generation  at  least  before  the  War, 
Artemis  is  worshipped  in  Caludon,  and  she  sends  the 
Boar  thither  to  avenge  the  lack  of  sacrifice.4  We  are 
thus  enabled  to  conjecture  that  in  this  instance,  even 
before  the  hand  of  Homer  was  applied  to  mythologic 
manipulation,  the  Hellenic  mind  had  done  its  work, 
and  she  was  fairly  impersonated  in  the  capacity  which 
we  find  that  she  fills  in  the  Poems.    We  meet  her  in 


1  II.  v.  445. 

3  Studies  on  Homer,  vol.  ii.  pp.  110,  144. 


2  II.  xxi.  489-496. 
4  II.  ix.  533-542. 


310 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


Troas,  where  she  taught  Scamandrios 1  to  hunt ;  she 
is  invoked  in  Ithaca  by  Penelope  ; 2  her  part  in  the 
legend  of  the  daughters  of  Pandareos  belongs  probably 
to  Crete;  and  we  have  seen  her  agency  in  Suri£,  and 
in  Die.3  Again,  in  OrtugiS  she  took  the  life  of  Orion. 
And  the  Artemis  of  Homer  has  no  relation  to  any  one 
or  more  places  in  particular. 

Apart  from  the  ministry  of  death,  and  from  this  ap- 
parent attribute  of  omnipresence,  her  powers,  in  regard 
both  to  Nature  and  to  the  mind,  are  those  of  the  lower 
or  secondary  order  of  the  Olympian  Court.  But,  in 
the  matter  of  personal  beauty,  she  is  the  rival  of 
Aphrodite  ;  and  here  she  appears  to  absorb  that  part 
of  the  tradition  which  afterwards  went  by  the  name  of 
the  heavenly  Aphrodite.  One  most  frequent  illustra- 
tion of  great  beauty  is  a  comparison  with  Aphrodite  the 
golden  ;  and  it  is  to  her  that  Achilles  refers 4  as  the 
model  of  loveliness.  But  the  incomparable  Nausicaa, 
who  appears  to  be  the  poet's  ideal  of  youthful  beauty 
combined  with  purity  and  excellence,5  is  likened  by 
Odysseus  to  Artemis  in  countenance,  bearing,  and 
stature.  And  again,  in  the  case  of  the  daughters  of 
Pandareos,  while  it  is  Here  who  confers  upon  them 
beauty  of  feature,  and  Aphrodite  simply  purveys  food 
for  them,  it  is  Artemis  who  gives  them  stature,  which 
I  suppose  to  include  all  that  relates  to  beauty  of  figure. 
It  is  noteworthy  that  stature  is  never  mentioned  (I 
think)  in  connection  with  Aphrodite,  and  I  suppose  it 
therefore  to  be  in  the  province  of  Artemis. 

While  this  attribute  marks  the  point  at  which  the 
traditions  appropriated  to  her  touch  upon  those  of 


1  II.  v.  49-52. 
4  H.  ix.  389. 


2  Od.  xx.  61,  71. 
5  Od.  vi.  150. 


3  Od.  y.  123. 


THE  DIVINITIES  OF  OLYMPOS. 


311 


Aphrodite,  on  the  other  hand  the  epithet  ayvrj,  the 
severely  pure,1  seems  to  indicate  her  point  of  contact 
with  Persephone,  the  Queen  of  Hades.  The  two  forms 
were,  as  we  know,  afterwards  fused  into  one. 

Section  XIII.  Persephone. 

Persephone  the  Queen  of  Hades  is  called  by  Homer 
the  6  severely  pure  '  the  4  majestic  '  (ayav//),  and 

the  'terrible'  (e,7toavr[).  And  she  represents  what  we 
might  reasonably  expect  from  her  position  as  Queen  in 
the  Underworld  :  a  mixture  of  Pelasgic  and  of  Eastern 
traditions.  Of  the  former,  because  all  the  Pelasgic 
Nature-Powers  had  been  disposed  of  by  carrying  them 
into  that  nether  sphere ;  of  the  latter,  because  the 
site  of  the  Underworld  of  Homer  was  in  the  East, 
the  entrance  to  it  by  the  point  of  the  rising  of  the 
Sun.2 

She  is  represented  as  ruling  together  with  A'idoneus, 
and  by  no  means  as  merely  his  wife.  Introduced  to- 
gether with  him  into  the  Legend  of  Phoenix  by  his 
father,  and  also  by  Althaia,3  she  seems  even  to  be 
charged  in  chief  with  the  sovereignty.  She  gathers 
the  Women-shades  for  Odysseus,  and  she  disperses 
them.  It  is  she  who,  as  he  fears,  may  send  forth  the 
head  of  Gorgo  should  he  tarry  over  long  ;  who  may 
have  deluded  him  with  an  Eidolon  or  shadow  in  lieu 
of  a  substance  ;  who  endows  Teiresias  with  the  func- 
tions of  a  Seer.4  On  the  shores  of  Ocean,  just  before 
the  point  of  descent  in  the  far  East,  are  the  groves  of 

i  Od.  v.  123;  xviii.  202  ;  xx.  71.  2  Od.  xii.  1-4. 

3  II.  ix.  457-569.  4  Od.  .xi.  226,  385,  634,  213  ;  and  x.  494. 


312 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


Persephone.  Aidoneus  does  no  personal  act  in  the 
Poems,  except  that  with  her  he  executes  the  impreca- 
tory vow  of  the  father  of  Phoenix  ; 1  and  that  he  trem- 
bles lest  the  crust  of  earth  should  be  riven  by 
earthquake,  during  the  battle  of  the  gods.2  Notwith- 
standing his  high  rank  as  the  brother  of  Zeus,  she  is 
the  principal,  and  he  is  the  secondary  figure  in  the 
weird  scenery  of  the  Eleventh  Odyssey. 

It  seems  very  probable  that  she  represents  that  old 
Pelasgian  tradition  of  the  awful  Damsel,  which  had, 
as  we  know  especially  from  the  mythological  itinerary 
of  Pausanias,  such  extraordinary  longevity  and  power 
in  the  Greek  religion.  Together  with  this,  we  have  to 
consider  1.  her  Eastern  site,  2.  her  gift  to  Teiresias, 
alone  among  the  dead  ;  connecting  her  on  the  one 
hand  with  Apollo,  the  God  of  foreknowledge,  but 
on  the  other  with  the  Phoenicians,  and  with  the 
Eastern  associations  of  which  they, were  the  chan- 
nels. 

The  name  Persephone  appears  to  attach  itself  by 
etymology  to  other  names  in  the  Homeric  Poems  ;  all 
of  which  are  Eastern  in  their  associations.  Perse,  the 
daughter  of  Okeanos,  is  also  the  wife  of  Helios,  and 
the  mother  of  Kirke,  who  dwells  in  Aiaie\  Each  of 
the  three  points  of  contact  thus  established  is  a  link 
to  the  East.  Perseus,  the  founder  of  the  dynasty 
which  precedes  the  Pelopids,  is  the  son  of  Zeus  and 
Danae,  a  parentage  which,  as  we  have  already  found, 
we  may  properly  consider  as  implying  a  foreign,  and 
an  Eastern,  origin.  In  the  person  of  Perseus,  the  son 
of  Nestor,3  the  name  is  continued  in  the  Neleid  House, 


1  II.  ix.  456,  457. 


2  II.  xx.  61-65. 


3  Od.  iii.  414. 


THE  DIVINITIES  OF  OLYMPOS. 


313 


which  appears  to  have  been  of  Phoenician  extraction. 
The  national  designation  of  Achaians  appears  also  not 
improbably  to  connect  itself  with  the  Persian  race 
through  the  name  Archaimenidai  and  otherwise,1 
which  may  not  improbably  have  contributed  an  ele- 
ment to  the  formation  of  the  Greek  nation. 

Our  first  historical  notice  of  that  race  is  about  the 
middle  of  the  ninth  century  before  Christ,2  when  Shal- 
maneser  II  found  them  in  South-western  Armenia. 
This  point  approximates  to  the  region,  in  which  the 
imagination  of  Homer  placed  the  shadowy  dwelling  of 
Persephone. 

In  the  later  tradition,  she  becomes  united  with  Arte- 
mis, and  so  related  to  Apollo  ;  a  relationship  of  which 
perhaps  we  have  a  single  Homeric  trace  in  her  com- 
mand over  the  knowledge  of  the  future. 

Section  XI Y.  Aphrodite. 

The  Aphrodite  of  Homer  was  a  goddess,  for  she  is 
the  daughter  of  Zeus,  and  of  Diond,  whose  residence 
is  in  Olympos,  and  who  belongs  to  the  divine  order.3 
She  is  also  herself  expressly  stated  to  belong  to  it.4 
But  it  does  not  appear  that  she  had  as  yet  come 
to  be  a  goddess  of  the  Hellenic  religion  properly  so 
called. 

In  order  to  estimate  her  position  in  the  scheme  of 
Homer,  the  following  circumstances  should  be  con- 
sidered :  — 

1.  There  is  no  trace  of  her  worship,  or  of  any  influ- 

1  See  Studies  on  Homer,  vol.  i.  p.  557. 

2  Rawlinson's  Ancient  Monarchies,  ii.  374  ;  iii.  349. 

3  II.  v.  370,  381,  383.  *  II.  v.  337-342 ;  xx.  105. 


314 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


ence  exercised  by  her  over  mortals,  either  in  Greece,  or 
among  the  Greeks. 

2.  She  is  never  once  exhibited  by  Homer  in  a  favor- 
able light ;  sometimes  in  a  neutral  one ;  more  com- 
monly in  an  odious  or  contemptible  point  of  view. 

3.  Though  herself  a  model  of  personal  beauty,1  she 
was  not  the  goddess  of  beauty,  inasmuch  as  she  had 
not  the  power  to  confer  the  gift.  Beauty  is  not  in- 
cluded in  the  properties 2  conveyed  by  the  Kestos  ;  and 
it  is  Here  who  endows  the  orphan  daughters  of  Pan- 
dareos  with  beauty,  while  Aphrodite  has  no  other  office 
assigned  to  her  in  their  rearing,  than  supplying  them 
with  food,  and  preferring  to  Zeus,  when  they  are  grown 
up,  the  prayer  that  they  may  marry.3 

4.  She  is  wounded  by  Diomed,  and  is  apparently 
destitute  alike  of  the  powers  of  resistance,  of  vengeance, 
and  of  endurance.  We  can  hardly  suppose  that  a 
deity  exhibited  in  a  light  so  contemptible,  as  is  Aphro- 
dite in  the  Battle  of  the  Fifth  Iliad,  was  as  yet  an  object 
of  Hellenic  worship.4 

5.  Her  helplessness  after  receiving  her  wound  from 
Diomed  is  remarkable.  While  Ares  rides  spontaneously 
to  heaven,5  Aphrodite  is  led  out  of  the  battle  by  Iris,6 
and  makes  a  petition  to  her  brother  Ares  for  the  loan 
of  his  chariot  and  horses,  that  she  may  by  their  means 
be  carried  to  Olympos. 

In  the  Lay  of  the  Net,  she  is  reported  as  going  from 
Olympos  to  Paphos  without  aid : 7  possibly  because  this 
is  a  descent,  not  an  ascent ;  or  more  probably  because 
in  a  Syrian  episode  her  rank  would  be  more  fully 
recognized  than  in  an  Hellenic  poem. 


i  II.  ix.  389. 

3  Od.  xx.  66-75.    Cf.  II.  v.  429. 
&  II.  v.  864-870.         6  II.  v.  353. 


2  II.  xiv.  198,  215. 
4  II.  v.  311-380. 
1  Od.  viii.  362. 


THE  DIVINITIES  OF  OLYMPOS. 


315 


6.  No  place  is  assigned  to  her,  even  on  the  losing 
side,  in  the  Theomachy,  which  determines  or  ushers 
in  the  issue  of  the  Iliad.  And  this  is  the  more  remark- 
able, because  a  fifth  deity  is  wanting  to  make  up  a 
number  equal  to  the  five  deities  of  the  Greeks ;  and 
Leto,  who  is  elsewhere  in  the  Poems  a  perfectly  mute 
person  age,  is  introduced  in  order  to  fill  it. 

7.  The  only  place  where  she  is  named  among  the 
Olympian  family,  is  in  the  Lay  of  the  Net,  a  tale 
apparently  of  Phoenician  importation,  and  of  Syrian 
origin.  She  bears  the  name  of  Cypris  ;  and  her  place 
of  abode  is  Cyprus,  where  were  her  altars,  and  her  glebe 
or  domain.1  She  was  therefore  worshipped  in  that 
island  ;  and  we  may  trace  her  worship  as  far  westward 
as  Cythera,  from  the  following  circumstances  :  first,  she 
is  twice  called  KvdeQaiu;2  and  secondly,  KvO^qul  are 
called  £aOsot,  an  epithet  which  always  indicates  the 
special  relation  of  the  place  to  some  deity.  Her  relation 
to  Paris 3  proves  that  she  was  in  some  manner  acknowl- 
edged in  Troas  ;  and  the  taunt  of  Helen  respecting 
her  supposed  favorites  in  Meonia  and  Phrygia  is  to  be 
taken  as  showing  that  she  was  also  recognized  as  a 
deity  in  those  regions.  In  effect  she  was  an  Asiatic 
deity  ;  and  her  name  and  worship  were  crossing  the  sea 
by  steps  towards  the  Greek  Peninsula.  But  she  must 
have  been  of  small  account  in  Asia  Minor,  or  she  could 
hardly  have  failed  to  find  a  place  in  the  Theomachy. 

8.  The  power  of  this  goddess  over  external  nature 
is  extremely  limited.  The  greatest  manifestation  of  it 
is  where  she  6  with  ease '  draws  Paris  out  of  the  fight, 


i  Od.  viii.  362.  2  Od.  viii.  288 ;  xviii.  193. 

3  II.  iii.  380-382. 


316 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


wrapping  him  in  vapor.1  In  the  Fifth  Book,  it  is  when 
she  is  slyly  dragging  off  iEneas,  covered  with  her  robe, 
that  Diomed  pursues  and  wounds  her,  6  knowing  that 
she  was  an  effeminate  or  strengthless  deity.'  2 

She  is  however  invested  with  a  certain  superintend- 
ence of  marriage  in  its  physical  aspect ;  and  in  this 
capacity  she  sends  to  Andromache  the  nuptial  gift  of 
her  hood  or  head-band.3 

Athene,  taunting  her  upon  her  wound,  makes  the 
supposition  4  that  she  got  it  in  undressing  some  Greek 
woman  that  she  had  persuaded  to  elope  with  one  of 
her  beloved  Trojans.  Nay,  Helen  also  bitterly  re- 
proaches her,  advising  her  to  cease  altogether  from 
pretending  to  divinity  ;  and  Aphrodite,  in  the  Third 
Iliad,  only  overcomes  her  by  the  violence  of  her  threats.5 
From  these  it  appears,  if  indeed  proof  were  wanting, 
that  this  character,  odious  on  the  side  of  lawless  indul- 
gence, has  its  base  in  simple  appetite,  and  in  no  degree 
carries  the  softening  accompaniments  of  gentleness  or 
compassion. 

In  the  Odyssey  it  is  contrived  that  the  Suitors,  before 
they  are  put  to  death,  shall  offer  gifts  to  Penelop£  ; 
perhaps  by  way  of  partial  requital  for  the  waste  of  the 
substance  of  Odysseus.  With  this  view,  the  Queen6 
issues  from  her  chamber,  like  to  Artemis  or  golden 
Aphrodite.  Aphrodite  is  introduced  here,  because  pas- 
sion was  the  motive  of  the  Suitors.  But  the  deity,  at 
whose  suggestion  Penelope  thus  adorned  herself,  was 
Pallas.  Had  Aphrodite  been  worshipped  in  Greece, 
this  office  surely  would  have  fallen  to  her.    It  is  yet 


i  II.  iii.  380. 

3  II.  v.  429;  xxii.  470. 

5  II.  iii.  413-417. 


2  II.  v.  331. ' 
4  II.  v.  422-425. 
6  Od.  xvii.  37. 


THE  DIVINITIES  OF  OLYMPOS. 


317 


more  noteworthy,  that  the  whole  design  is  executed  by 
Pallas.  Penelope  is  lulled  to  sleep ;  and  then  Pallas 
applies  ambrosion  to  her  face,  6  such  as  Aphrodite 
uses  when  she  goes  among  the  Graces.'  But  Aphrodite 
herself  is  excluded  from  the  entire  process. 

Even  in  the  Lay  of  the  Net;  apparently  a  legend  of 
the  Eastern  mythology,  the  Poet  seems  to  intend  to 
make  the  guilty  pair  ridiculous  by  sending  them  off, 
when  released,  so  rapidly  and  in  silence.1 

9.  She  is  never  invested  with  any  of  the  higher 
attributes,  such  as  foreknowledge,  omnipresence,  or 
command  over  the  mind  of  man.  Her  only  power 
seems  to  be  that  of  stimulating  passion.2 

10.  We  now  know  that  the  planetary  worship  of  the 
Assyrians  was  brought  by  the  Phoenicians  into  Greece, 
and  that  each  deity  wras  associated  with  a  particular 
metal.  We  find  in  Cyprus,  the  land  of  copper,  with 
a  Phoenician  colony,  the  worship  of  Aphrodite.  We 
may  safely  then  refer  the  origin  of  this  Olympian  per- 
sonage to  the  Assyrian  mythology. 

The  local  indications  of  her  worship,  as  proceeding 
from  the  East,  are  in  accordance  with  the  traditions 
which  under  the  names  of  Astarte,  Ashtoreth,  Mylitta, 
Mitra,  exhibit  to  us  a  similar  character  as  held  in 
honor  there.  The  marriage  with  Hephaistos  bears  a 
similar  witness;  the  more  remarkable,  because  it  is 
only  recognized  in  the  mythology  of  the  Outer  world, 
drawn  from  the  Phoenicians,  while  in  the  Iliad  he  is 
the  suitor  of  Charis.  Aphrodite,  however,  is  placed  by 
Homer  in  relation  with  the  Charites,  Eastern  person- 
ages, whose  name  corresponds  with  the  Sanscrit  Harits, 


i  Od.  viii.  300. 


*  II.  xiv.  215-217  ;  xxiv.  30. 


318 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


meaning  originally  4  bright,'  and  afterwards  the  horses 
of  the  dawn.1  In  very  late  mythology,  Aphrodite;  ap- 
pears as  the  daughter. of  Poseidon,2  and  thus  acquires 
a  new  note  of  Eastern  origin. 

In  historic  Greece,  we  find  the  double  tradition  of  the 
heavenly  and  the  promiscuous  Aphrodite.  It  would 
seem  as  though  any  elements  of  the  former  character, 
known  to  Homer,  were  assigned  by  him  to  his  chaste 
Artemis,  the  rival  in  beauty  of  his  Aphrodite.  The 
pure  tradition  was,  according  to  the  view  of  Max 
Miiller,  the  original  basis  of  the  character  of  Aphrodite  ; 
and  he  thinks  that  it  was  'afterwards  debased  by  an 
admixture  of  Syrian  mythology.' 3  He  gives  to  this 
word  his  favorite  meaning  of  the  'dawn.'  Some  old 
traditions  however  connect  Aphrodite  as  Astarte  with 
the  Moon.4  There  has  been  therefore  an  intermixture 
of  the  traditions,  which  ultimately  distributed  them- 
selves between  Artemis,  Aphrodite,  and  Persephone" ; 
and  there  is  a  certain  correspondence  of  the  two  first, 
as  we  find  them  in  Homer,  with  the  vulgar  and  the 
heavenly  Aphrodite  of  later  times  respectively. 

Of  the  name  there  seems  to  be  no  sign  in  the 
Albanian  tongue,  which  brings  down  to  us  so  much 
of  the  old  speech  of  the  Pelasgoi.  But  the  root  of 
the  name  Venus  is  found  in  the  Gegian  branch  of  the 
language.5 

1  Max  Miiller,  Lect.  on  Language,  Second  Series,  p.  370. 

2  Pausanias,  Corinthiaca. 

3  Lectures,  Second  Series,  p.  373. 

4  Hahn,  Albanesische  Studien,  p.  250.  '  Wir  glauben  diese  Verbin- 
dung  mit  dem  in  so  vielen  Spracben  dem  Hahnrei  zukommenden 
Hornern  zusammen  stellen  zu  diirfen.'  p.  251.  See  Smith,  Diet. 
Bibb,  Art.  Asbtoreth.  , 

5  Halm,  ibid. 


THE  DIVINITIES  OF  OLYMPOS. 


319 


Dion£,  the  mother  of  Aphrodite,  resides  in  Olympos. 
Homer  affords  us  no  means  of  tracing  her  origin  or 
functions  ;  but  from  other  evidence  we  have  been  ena- 
bled to  interpret  her  as  a  Nature-Power  of  the  Pelas- 
gian  worship.  If  this  is  so,  then  probably  we  are  to 
consider  her  motherhood  to  be  assigned  to  her,  not  in 
virtue  of  that  Syrian  character  of  Aphrodite,  which  we 
trace  in  the  South,  but  of  the  place  which  Aphrodite 
(or  Venus)  appears  to  have  held  in  the  Trojan  system, 
and  therefore  in  the  Pelasgian  cultus  of  the  Nature- 
Powers. 

Section  XT.  Dionusos. 

The  traditions  of  Dionusos  in  Homer  are  as  dark  as 
they  are  slight.  On  the  one  hand  he  is  the  son  of 
Semele  :  and  we  have  no  case  in  the  Homeric  Theogony 
where  a  deity  is  born  of  a  woman  :  but  Semele  is  men- 
tioned in  the  list  given  by  Zeus  among  the  mortal 
mothers  of  his  children,  who  stand  separate  from 
the  goddess  mothers.  She  comes  between  the  un- 
named mother  of  Minos,  and  Alcmen£  ; 1  and  the  birth 
of  Dionusos  thus  appears  to  be  parallel  with  that  of 
Heracles.  Dionusos  is,  however,  called  in  this  passage 
'  a  joy  to  mortals  ; '  which  may  of  itself  faintly  seem  to 
sever  him  from  the  race.  Neither  is  there  in  the 
Poems  any  clearly  divine  act  assigned  to  him.  The 
Homeric  Hymn  to  Hermes  treats  Semele  as  the 
daughter  or  descendant  of  Kadmos.2 

But  on  the  other  hand  there  is  a  great  resemblance 
between  the  good  offices  of  Metis  to  him  and  to 
Hephaistos.3    When  the  terrible  Lucourgos  attacks 


i  II.  xiv.  323-325.  2  v.  57. 

3  See  supra,  Sect.  Hephaistos. 


320 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


and  scourges  his  nurses,  he  trembling  takes  refuge 
in  the  sea ;  and  Thetis  receives  him  in  her  bosom.1 
This  is  confirmed  indirectly  by  the  Odyssey,2  which 
represents  him  as  the  giver  to  that  goddess  of  the 
golden  urn  which  she  used  for  the  ashes  of  Achilles  ; 
doubtless  in  requital  for  her  services,  which  are 
thoroughly  in  Keeping  with  her  character  as  the  great 
mediatress  in  matters  respecting  contrasted  or  com- 
peting worships. 

The  conclusive  test,  however,  is  found  in  this,  that 
the  recital  concerning. Lucourgos  is  offered  to  illustrate 
a  class  of  cases  where  outrage  is  offered  by  mortals  to 
deities ;  and  the  scourging  of  his  nurses  is  treated 
as  an  offence  to  himself,  for  which,  accordingly,  not 
however  by  him,  but  by  Zeus,  Lucourgos  was  smitten 
with  blindness,  and  then  cut  off  prematurely.3  Homer 
must  therefore  be  understood  to  include  him  in  the 
phrase  4  gods  of  heaven.' 

In  the  Odyssey  we  have  a  probable  sign  of  his  wor- 
ship. Ariadne  is  put  to  death  in  Di£7  supposed  to  be 
Naxos,  by  Artemis,  when  Theseus  is  carrying  her  to 
Athens.  Artemis  does  this  4  upon  the  testimony  of 
Dionusos.' 4  The  only  probable  construction  of  these 
words  which  offers  itself  is,  that  Theseus  landed  with 
Ariadne  in  Naxos,  as  Paris  had  landed  with  Helen  in 
CranaS,  and  that  Dionusos  procured  the  intervention 
of  Artemis  to  avenge  a  meditated  profanation ;  which 
presumes  that  the  island,  or  some  place  in  it,  was 
sacred  to  him.  It  is  also  likely,  that  the  epithet  qyadEov 
applied  to  the  Nusei'an  mount,  means  that  it  was  sacred 
to  him  as  a  god. 


i  H.  vi.  136. 

*  II.  vi.  129-140. 


2  Od.  xxiv.  74. 
4  Od.  xi.  321-325. 


THE  DIVINITIES  OF  OLYMPOS. 


321 


Nagelsbach  observes,1  tbat  Homer  places  neither 
him  nor  Demeter  in  Olympos  by  any  distinct  recital 
or  declaration.  But  in  both  cases  the  recognition 
of  deity,  coupled  with  the  personal  relation  to  Zeus, 
appears  to  make  good  the  title. 

At  the  same  time,  I  have  pointed  out  an  incon- 
sistency which  I  do  not  know  how  to  rectify.  The 
traditions  are  not  closely  pieced  together. 

What  is  most  clear  about  Dionusos  in  Homer  is, 
first,  that  his  worship  was  extremely  recent ;  secondly, 
that  it  made  its  appearance  in  Thrace,2  to  which 
belongs  the  Nusei'an  mountain ;  thirdly,  that  it  was 
violently  opposed  on  its  introduction,  a  fact  of  which 
we  have  other  records,  as  for  example,  in  the  Bacchae 
of  Euripides. 

Lucourgos,  who  resisted  and  punished  it,  was  the 
son  of  Druas  ;  and  Druas  was  alive  and  a  warrior  in 
the  youth  of  Nestor.  Consequently,  Dionusos  was  an 
infant,  that  is,  his  worship  was  in  its  infancy,  not  more 
than  two  generations  before  the  War  of  Troy.  The 
Hymn  addressed  to  Dionusos  describes  how  Tursenians 
found  him  on  the  shore,  and  brought  him  over  sea. 
The  coloring  of  this  legend  is  Phoenician ;  as  is  that 
of  the  legend,  if  such  there  were,  that  gave  him  the  isle 
of  Naxos  as  the  seat  of  his  worship.  It  is  also  on  the 
sea  shore  that  he  appears,  according  to  Homer  ;  and  it 
is  in  Thrace,  where  there  would  seem  to  have  been 
Phoenician  manufactures  of  metal.  Again,  he  obtains 
a  work  of  art,  probably  Phoenician,  from  Hephaistos,3 
just  as  does  Phaidimos,  the  king  of  the  Sidonians.4 


i  Horn.  Theol.  p.  115. 
3  Od.  tsxiv.  74. 


21 


2  Nagelsbach,  p.  9. 
4  Od.  iv.  615-619. 


322 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


And  the  name  of  Semele1  itself,  according  to  general 
traditions,  supports  the  Phoenician  association  thus 
established  at  a  variety  of  points. 

We  cannot  perhaps  treat  the  Dionusos  of  Homer  as 
the  discoverer  of  wine,  and  father  of  its  use,  in  Greece  ; 
for  it  is  universal  and  familiar,  while  he  appears  to  be 
but  local  and  as  yet  strange.  The  novel  feature,  which 
connects  itself  with  his  name,  seems  to  be  the  use  of 
wine  by  women  ;  and  the  effect  produced,  in  an  extra- 
ordinary and  furious  excitement,  which  might  well 
justify  not  only  jealousy,  but  even  forcible  resistance  to 
demoralizing  orgies.  It  seems  then,  as  if  this  usage 
was  introduced  by  immigrants  of  a  race  comparatively 
wealthy  and  luxurious,  and  was  resisted  by,  or  on  behalf 
of,  the  older  and  simpler  population. 

The  later  account  of  Hesiod  makes  Dionusos  the 
husband  of  Ariadne*,  who  was  the  daughter  of  Minos. 
The  poet  of  Ascra  thus  places  him  within  the  circle  of 
Phoenician  traditions. 

Though  'Homer  has  represented  this  personage  as  a 
god,  and  though,  as  we  see,  traces  of  his  worship  are  not 
wanting,  yet  the  human  maternity  might  possibly  indi- 
cate that  we  should  do  best  to  regard  him  as  a  deified 
mortal,  rather  than  as  a  god  from  the  beginning  of  his 
existence.  In  this  case,  we  are  to  suppose  that  the 
fascination  of  the  usage  he  introduced  not  only  proved 
so  powerful  as  to  overrule  all  opposition,  but  likewise 
generated  a  halo  which  was  reflected  on  his  birth,  and 
caused  his  deification  by  a  process  more  rapid  than  that 
which  took  effect  upon  Heracles  or  the  Tyndarids.  In 
the  later  time,  greater  consistency  was  given  to  the 
legend  by  a  parallel  deification  of  Semele,  his  mother. 


a  Hymn  to  Dionusos,  v.  57. 


THE  DIVINITIES  OF  OLYMPOS. 


323 


Homer  has  attached  no  ennobling  epithet  or  circum- 
stance of  dignity  to  the  name  of  Dionusos,  unless  we 
so  regard  the  eulogy  of  Zeus1  under  an  excess  of  ex- 
citement. The  Poet  acts  in  this  case  as  in  the  cases 
of  Ar£s  and  Aphrodite  ;  since  he  has  no  reverence  for 
either  drunkenness,  or  violence,  or  lust. 

Section  XVI.    Helios,  or  the  Sun. 

It  is  sometimes  stated,  that  Helios,  or  the  Sun,  does 
not  appear  as  a  god  in  the  Iliad,  but  only  in  the 
Odyssey.  This  is  not  so.  As  far  as  the  Odyssey  is 
concerned,  he  appears  only  in  the  Outer,  not  in  the 
Inner,  world.  In  the  Iliad  his  personality  is  undeni- 
able, though  very  faint.  The  Sun  hearing  all,  as  well 
as  seeing  all,  is  certainly  a  person.2 

Again,  all  will  remember  the  long  day  of  the  Iliad, 
with  the  close  of  which  the  successes  of  the  Trojans 
were  to  end.  When  the  appointed  moment  came,  at 
the  command  of  Here"  the  Sun  went,  unwillingly,3  to  his 
rest  beside  the  Ocean  stream. 

Here  then  he  is  a  person,  though  in  the  background. 
In  the  Odyssey,  he  reappears  with  more  marked  effect. 
In  the  Lay  of  Demodocos,  it  is  he  who  first  makes 
known  to  Hephaistos  the  intimacy  of  Ares  with  Aphro- 
dite,4 and  then  undertakes  to  act  as  spy  upon  the 
guilty  couple.  The  Island  of  Thrinakie,  placed  by 
Homer  not  far  from  the  entrance  to  the  Euxine,  is 
his  island.5  Here  are  his  oxen,  and  his  sheep,  tended 
by  the  care  of  his  daughters,  whose  mother  was 

1  II.  xiv.  325.  2  n.  in.  277.  3  II.  xviii.  239. 

4  Od.  viii.  270,  302.         5  Qd.  xii.  127,  261,  274. 


324 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


Neaira,  and  who  were  called  Phaethusa  and  Lampetie*.1 
These  animals  the  crew  of  Odysseus  had  been  warned 
on  no  account  to  molest.  Under  the  direst  pressure 
of  famine,2  however,  they  at  length  slew  certain  of 
the  oxen  ;  having  first  vowed  that  on  their  return  to 
Ithaca3  they  would  build  a  temple  to  the  Sun  and  store 
it  richly  ;  a  sign,  it  may  be  remembered,  that  such  an 
edifice  would  be  a  novelty  in  the  island.  Portents, 
such  as  we  nowhere  else  encounter  in  the  Poems,  wait 
upon  the  deed  ;  the  hides  of  the  animals  creep  about, 
and  the  flesh,  even  when  roasted,  lows  upon  the  spits.4 
Notwithstanding  the  Sun's  all-seeing  function,  it  is 
Lampetie  who  carries  him  the  news.  It  seems  possible, 
however,  as  Odysseus  was  asleep,  that  we  are  to  under- 
stand the  deed  to  have  been  done  by  night.  The  god 
makes  his  complaint  in  the  court  of  the  Immortals, 
to  which  he  is  thus  proved  to  belong;5  and  he  de- 
mands reparation  for  the  loss  of  his  oxen,  with  whom 
4  he  disported  himself  night  and  morning.'  Failing  it, 
he  declares  that  he  will  thenceforward  shine  in  Hades. 
Zeus  at  once  promises  to  destroy  the  crew  at  sea,  which 
is  done  accordingly.6 

The  extraordinary  sanctity  ascribed  to  these  oxen  is 
wholly  alien  to  the  genius  of  the  Greek  mythology. 
But  when  we  turn  to  the  East,  and  observe  that  Phoenicia 
was  impregnated  with  Egyptian  traditions,  we  find  the 
sacredness  of  the  ox,  and  its  relation  to  the  Sun,  indi- 
cated in  the  consecration  of  Apis  to  Osiris  ;  while  the 
function  of  the  ox  in  agriculture  also  falls  in  with  the 
earlier  form  of  the  religion,  which  appears  to  have 


i  Od.  xii.  132.  2  Od.  xii.  330,  353.  3  Od.  xii.  345. 

4  Od.  xii.  394.  5  Od.  xii.  377.  6  Od.  xii.  403-419. 


THE  DIVINITIES  OF  OLYMPOS. 


325 


regarded  Isis  as  the  land,  or.  passive  principle,  and 
Osiris  as  the  Nile-god,  who  taught  to  the  Egyptians  the 
use  of  the  plough. 

And  again,  we  find  in  the  temple  of  Jerusalem,  for 
the  erection  of  which  Solomon  called  in  the  aid  of 
Phoenician  workmen,  the  forms  of  twelve  oxen,1  sup- 
porting a  brazen  sea.2  These  were  made  by  King 
Hiram  of  Tyre ;  and  they  symbolize  at  once  the  Egyp- 
tian religion,  with  other  Oriental  forms  of  fable,  and 
the  maritime  pursuits  of  the  Phoenicians. 

It  is  also  remarkable,  that  the  use  of  the  ox  for  meat 
appears  to  cease  in  the  Outer  world  of  the  Odyssey. 
In  the  land  of  the  Cyclops,  we  find  only  sheep  and 
goats.  And  it  is  with  mutton  only  that  Kirke  stocks 
the  vessel  of  Odysseus. 

All  these  indications  agree  together.  In  other  re- 
spects, too,  Helios  is  marked  as  an  Eastern  god.  He  is 
the  father  of  Aietes,  and  of  Kirk£,  dwelling  near  the 
Eastern  Okeanos ; 8  and  the  island  of  Aiaie"  is  indicated 
as  the  place  of  his  rising.4  The  fact  of  his  sporting  with 
the  oxen  night  and  morning  goes  far  to  show  that 
Homer  did  not  think  the  earth  a  plane,  but  round, 
perhaps  as  upon  a  cylinder,  and  believed  that  the  West 
and  East  were  in  contact.  But  only  in  the  East 
does  he  give  the  Sun  a  dwelling.  Aietes,  the  son 
of  Helios,  carries  the  exclusively  Phoenician  epithet 

Of  oloOCfQCQV. 

Further,  we  may  notice  that,  as  long  as  the  Voyage 
of  Odysseus  is  in  the  West  and  North,  we  hear  noth- 
ing of  the  Sun.    Poseidon  rules  in  the  land  of  the 


i  1  Kings  vii.  24,  25,  44. 
3  Od.  x.  138. 


2  1  Kings  vii.  13. 
4  Od.  xii.  4. 


326 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


Cyclops,  stirs  the  northern  sea  into  a  tempest,  and 
is  supreme  in  Scherie.  It  is  in  Aiaie,  and  Thrinaki^, 
that  we  are  brought  into  contact  with  this  deity,  and 
both  these  islands  appear  to  lie  in  Homer's  East. 

Thus  the  Sun,  by  many  concurrent  signs,  is  marked 
out  to  us  as  an  Eastern  deity.  There  is  not  in  the 
Odyssey  the  faintest  trace  of  his  identification  with 
Apollo.  The  traditions  respecting  him  were  doubt- 
less conveyed  by  the  Phoenicians ;  but  we  cannot  say 
that  they  were  Phoenician  in  themselves.  The  division 
of  regions  to  which  I  have  adverted,  seems  to  point  to 
Poseidon  as  the  god  of  Phoinikes  proper,  and  to  Helios 
as  the  god  of  the  Canaanitish  population  of  Syria  to  the 
Eastward.  Among  them  it  is  not  improbable  that,  at 
the  period  represented  by  Homer,  the  Egyptian  belief 
extensively  prevailed,  but  Assyrian  elements  may  also 
enter  into  this  conception. 

In  the  Iliad,  though  not  in  the  Odyssey,  we  have  a 
sign  of  the  process  which  finally  incorporated  the  tra- 
ditions of  Apollo  with  the  Sun ;  while  the  humanitarian 
spirit  of  the  Olympian  system  of  Homer  seems  to  have 
resisted  the  operation.  The  plague  of  the  First9  Book 
can  hardly  represent  any  thing  else  than  the  miasma 
rising  from  the  marshes  of  the  Troad,  and  the  arrows 
of  Apollo  are  the  rays  of  the  sun  causing  the  moisture 
to  evaporate.  We  find  a  family  of  epithets  applied  to 
Apollo,  which  evidently  glance  at  the  solar  properties : 
Hekaergos,  Hekatebolos,  Hekebolos.  It  is  some- 
what remarkable  that  these  epithets,  which  are  only 
used  twenty -five  times  in  the  other  forty-seven  books  of 
the  Poems,  are  met  twelve  times  in  the  First  Iliad 
alone.  It  is  also  likely  that  the  epithet  Phoibos  may 
glance  at  the  relation  between  Apollo  and  the  Sun,  al- 


THE  DIVINITIES  OF  OLYMPOS. 


327 


ready  recognized  beyond  the  borders  of  Greece,  and 
possibly  also  in  the  old  Pelasgian  religion  of  the  Penin- 
sula. Again  we  have  the  term  Lnkabas  applied  to  the 
year.  It  is  probable  that  in  the  religion  of  Troy,  where 
Nature-worship  seems  to  have  prevailed  more  largely, 
Apollo  and  the  Sun  were  identified,  and  that  this  union 
made  it  convenient  for  the  Poet  to  place  Apollo  on  the 
Trojan  side  in  the  war.  Whilst  Poseidon  built  the 
walls  of  Troy  for  King  Laomedon,  Apollo  fed  his  oxen  ; 
and  we  have  seen  the  close  relation  between  these  ani- 
mals and  the  worship  of  the  Sun.  And  this  inter- 
pretation accounts  for  what  otherwise  would  be  most 
difficult  to  explain :  I  mean  the  fact  that  Helios  does 
not  appear  in  the  Theomachy,  nor  does  he  under  that 
name  take  part  in  the  war,  though  his  inclination  to- 
wards the  Trojans  is  plainly  declared.  Troy  was  prob- 
ably a  sort  of  meeting-point  for  Greek  and  Asiatic 
systems.  But  in  the  Phoenician  or  Syrian  mythology 
of  the  Outer  world,  Apollo  and  Helios  can  appear  to- 
gether, because  the  Eastern  conception  of  the  latter 
ran  no  risk  of  being  confounded  in  the  Greek  mind 
with  the  purely  anthropomorphic  idea  of  the  true  Ho- 
meric Apollo. 

Section  XYII.  Hebe. 

HebS  is  a  deity,  whose  offices  are  very  clearly  set 
forth,  but  whom  we  can  scarcely  consider  as  having  a 
perceptible  root  in  any  tradition  beyond  the  circle  of 
the  Greek  mythology. 

She  is  the  Cup-bearer,  who  pours  out  nectar  for  the 
gods.1    She  puts  together  the  parts  of  the  chariot  of 

i  II.  iv.  2. 


328 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


Here,  though  Here  herself  yokes  the  horses  to  it,  be- 
fore her  descent  to  the  field  of  battle.1  She  performs 
the  offices  of  the  bath  for  Ares,  after  he  has  been 
healed  by  Paieon.2  Again,  we  find  her  in  the  Eleventh 
Odyssey,  as  the  celestial  bride  of  Heracles,  and  in  an 
obelized  verse,  as  the  daughter  of  Zeus  and  Here\3 

Her  offices  are  exclusively  Olympian;  and  she  is 
nowhere  brought  into  relations  with  our  mortal  state  ; 
one  sign  among  many  that  she  is  probably  to  be  re- 
garded as  a  purely  ideal  conception. 

Her  name  in  Greek  expresses  youth  adult,  or  full 
age  just  attained.  Her  marriage  with  Heracles  appears 
to  signify  that  the  divine  gift  of  an  unending  youth  is 
imparted  to  him  when  he  reaches  Olympos.4  Homer 
assigns  to  her  the  epithet  callisphuros,  prettily 
ankled,  which  he  only  gives  to  those  who  are  to  be 
understood  as  youthful  persons;  Danae,  Ino,  and  Mar- 
pessa.5 

She  may  well  be  conceived  as.  the  daughter  of  Zeus 
in  that  general  sense,  according  to  which  he  is  the 
father  of  divinities  in  general;  and  thus  it  must  be,  in 
all  likelihood,  that  the  Muses,  the  Hours,  and  the 
Nymphs  in  general  are  his  daughters.  But  these  per- 
sonages are  not  daughters  of  Her£,  who  has  but  few 
children,  and  those  due  apparently  to  special  tradi- 
tions. In  truth  she  expresses  the  idea  of  youth,6  and 
is  perhaps  but  a  thought  seized  and  personified. 
There  is  no  note  in  Homer  of  her  worship  on  earth, 
which  however  is  mentioned  by  Strabo  and  Pausanias  : 

i  II.  v.  722,  731.  2  ii.  v.  905.         3  od.  xi.  602-604. 

4  Hes.  Theog.  944-955.    Ov.  Met.  ix.  400. 

5  II.  xiv.  319 ;  ix.  557.    Od.  v.  333. 

6  Nagelsbach,  Horn.  Theol.  p.  41. 


THE  DIVINITIES  OF  OLYMPOS. 


329 


and  Halm  finds  no  trace  of  her  in  the  Albanian 
language. 

It  is  the  distinct  and  clear,  though  simple,  account 
given  by  Homer  of  her  functions,  which  seems  to  give 
her  a  place  in  the  Olympian  court  upon  one  of  the 
twenty  thrones  of  Hephaistos. 


Slightly  as  her  outline  is  drawn,  we  cannot  refuse 
to  reckon  Themis  among  the  ordinary,  members  of  the 
Olympian  Court,  for  the  simple  reason  that  we  find 
her  actually  installed  there.  When,  in  the  absence  of 
Zeus,  Here  enters  the  company  of  the  Immortals,  and 
they  rise  in  honor  of  her,1  it  is  from  Themis,  who  came 
first  to  meet  her,  that  she  accepts  the  cup  of  greeting. 
This  is  evidently  because  she  had  been  presiding :  for 
Here,  who  is  troubled  at  the  view,  invites  her  to  con- 
tinue to  preside.2 

Again,  in  the  Twentieth  Iliad,  all  the  deities,  includ- 
ing the  minor  Nature-Powers  (whom  Homer  probably 
recognizes  as  divine  because  they  continued  to  hold 
their  ground  in  local  worship),  are  invited  to  the 
Great  Assembly  which  is  to  decide  finally  the  fate  of 
Troy  :  and  it  is  Themis  who  summons  them.3 

In  the  Second  Odyssey,  Telemachos  describes  him- 
self as  making  his  prayer  to  Zeus,  and  to  Themis,4 
who  collects  and  dissolves  public  assemblies  generally. 

Nevertheless,  I  apprehend  we  are  not  to  look  for  her 
origin  in  any  foreign  traditions,  but  simply  to  regard 
her  as  a  creation  of  the  Hellenic  mind,  and  probably 


Section  XYIII.  Themis. 


i  II.  xv.  85. 

3  II.  XX.  4. 


2  II.  xv.  95. 
4  Od.  ii.  68,  69. 


330 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


of  the  mind  of  our  Poet  himself.  Like  Hebe  she  rep- 
resents, in  the  main,  the  deification  of  an  impersonated 
idea.1 

In  reference  to  terrestrial  affairs,  the  name  Themis 
signifies  civil  right,  and  is  the  basis  on  which  are 
founded  the  relations  of  the  whole  political  and  social 
order.  If  Olympos  was  to  be  fashioned  into  a  quasi- 
common wealth,  such  a  personage  could  hardly  be  dis- 
pensed with  in  its  formation,  among  a  race  with  whom 
the  political  spirit  was  so  strong  as  among  the  Greeks 
of  the  heroic  age. 

Even  Hestie,  who  represents  the  principle  of  the 
family  order,  in  the  same  way  as  Themis  represents 
the  groundwork  of  the  State,  though  she  is  not  imper- 
sonated by  Homer,  yet  is  at  the  least  on  her  way  to 
impersonation,  and  attains  fully  to  it  after  his  time. 
She  was  less  necessary  to  the  theogonic  scheme  of  the 
Poet ;  for,  though  the  family  is  involved  in  the  Olym- 
pian arrangements,  it  does  not  embrace  the  whole  of 
them,  whereas  Olympos  gives  the  complete  picture  of  a 
Court  and  a  Polity. 

Hahn 2  derives  the  name  of  Themis  from  dep,  4  I 
speak,'  and  observes  that  the  statue  of  this  deity 
was  placed  over  against  the  bema  of  the  orators  in 
Athens. 

Section  XIX.  Paieon. 

In  the  Fifth  Iliad,  Dione  recites  that  when  Aides, 
wounded  by  Heracles,  repaired  to  Olympos,  Paieon 
(or  Paian)  applied  anodyne  drugs  to  his  shoulder, 
and  healed  him.3    It  is  evident  that  the  presence  of 

1  Welcker,  Gr.  Gotterlehre,  i.  700. 

2  Alban.  Studien,  p.  253.  3  H  v.  395-402. 


THE  DIVINITIES  OF  OLYMPOS. 


331 


this  deity  there,  as  the  healer,  was  regarded  by  the 
Poet  as  habitual ;  for  when  Ar£s  has  been  wounded 
by  Diomed,  and  appears  in  the  palace  of  Zeus,  his 
father,  after  rebuking  him,  commands  Paieon 1  to  heal 
him,  which  accordingly  is  done  forthwith,  as  by  one  at 
hand. 

In  the  Fourth  Odyssey,  Helen,  after  using  the  drug, 
which  produces  the  effect  of  opium,  and  may  indeed 
be  opium,  states  that  she  obtained  it  from  the  Egyp- 
tian Poludamna,  wife  of  Thon  ; 2  and  adds  that  every 
Egyptian  is  eminently  a  physician,  since  they  are  of 
the  race  of  Paieon. 

Apollo  is  a  healer  as  well  as  Paieon :  but  while 
Paieon  heals  by  instrumental  causes  after  the  manner 
of  a  man,  Apollo  heals  Glaucos  immediately,  as  by  a 
divine  action.3 

The  Phaiakes  are  called  angchitheoi,  near  to  di- 
vine, because  the  royal  house  of  Alkinoos  is  descended 
from  Poseidon.  Something  like  this  may  be  meant 
with  respect  to  the  Egyptians  and  Paieon :  or  just 
possibly  they  may  be  called  children  of  Paieon  for  no 
other  reason  than  their  medical  skill,  without  actually 
implying  that  the  traditions  relating  to  the  person  of 
Paieon  were  Egyptian. 

But  the  word  Paieon,  which  is  the  name  of  this 
deity,  is  also  twice  used  in  the  Iliad  for  a  hymn :  first 
for  the  hymn  of  purgation,  addressed  to  Apollo,  after 
the  offence  of  the  First  Book  has  been  expiated ;  sec- 
ondly for  the  hymn  of  triumph  sung  by  the  Greek 
soldiers  over  the  lifeless  body  of  Hector.4 


l  II.  v.  899. 

3  See  supra,  sect.  viii. 


2  Od.  iv.  227  seqq. 
4  H.  i.  473  ;  xxii.  391. 


332 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


A  singular  relation  is  thus  established  between 
Paieon  and  Apollo,  somewhat  like  that  between  the 
Sun  and  the  same  deity ;  as  though  Homer  had  not 
been  willing  to  treat  as  amalgamated,  or  even  had  actu- 
ally severed  into  two  personages  traditions  which  had 
already,  and  elsewhere,  been  combined  ;  for  the  reason 
that  parts  of  them  did  not  seem  to  be  of  sufficient 
elevation  to  suit  the  rest,  and  to  be  proper  for  the 
equipment  of  so  gorgeous  a  figure  as  his  Apollo. 

The  name  paian  became  subsequently  the  estab- 
lished name  of  those  Hymns  to  Apollo,  which  were 
sung  in  connection  with  victory  and  deliverance,  espe- 
cially, as  it  seems,  upon  a  completed  act  of  purifi- 
cation.1 

Welcker  observes  that,  even  down  to'  a  late  epoch, 
the  separate  personality  of  Paieon  had  not  alto- 
gether been  submerged,  as  Cicero  mentions  a  statue 
to  him.2 

It  is  however  possible  that  he  may  be,  like  Hebe, 
a  purely  ideal  personage,  not  rooted  in  former  or  in 
foreign  tradition,  and  representing  in  a  physical  way 
the  office  of  healing  in  Olympos  itself,  as  Hebe 
represents  the  faculty  of  youth  among  the  divine 
race. 

Section  XX.  Iris. 

Iris,  constantly  introduced  in  the  Iliad  as  the  ordi- 
nary messenger  between  Olympos  and  mankind,  and 
likewise  among  the  gods  themselves,  is  nowhere  men- 
tioned in  the  Odyssey.    Yet  the  name  of  Iros  is  given 

1  Miiller's  Dorians,  vol.  i.  pp.  319,  320.  (Transl.) 

2  Welcker,  Gr.  Gotterlehre,  vol.  i.  p.  695. 


THE  DIVINITIES  OP  OLYMPOS. 


333 


to  Arnaios  the  vagrant,  because  it  naturally  fell  to  him 
to  circulate  messages  and  news  ;  and  it  is  evidently 
derived  from,  or  from  the  same  source  with,  the  name 
of  this  deity.1 

Her  office  in  the  Iliad  is  not  exclusive.  Themis  is 
the  pursuivant  who  summons  the  gods  to  the  great 
assembly  ;'2  and  Hermes  is  the  envoy  or  agent  who,  in 
consequence  of  the  general  resolution  of  the  gods  re- 
specting the  body  of  Hector,  is  employed  to  conduct 
Priam  to  and  from  the  presence  of  Achilles.3 

In  the  Odyssey,  Zeus  does  not  act  in  his  individual 
capacity,  but  only  as  head  of  the  Olympian  Court ;  and 
Iris  is  his  personal  messenger  rather  than  the  agent  or 
envoy  of  the  Olympian  Court.  There  is  therefore  no 
obvious  place  for  her  in  a  poem  where  the  conduct  of 
affairs  rests,  in  the  Greek  sphere,  with  Athene,  and 
beyond  that  sphere  either  with  Poseidon,  or  with  the 
collective  body  of  the  gods. 

The  name  of  Iris  is  also  the  Greek  name  for  the 
rainbow ;  and  the  correspondence  is  very  remarkable 
between  her  office  of  messenger  from  heaven  to  man, 
and  the  traditional  function  of  the  rainbow  as  a  sign 
that  the  great  covenants  of  Nature  remain  undisturbed.4 
As  it  is  only  by  the  tradition  recorded  in  Scripture  that 
the  rainbow  has  this  meaning,  and  not  by  any  obvious 
natural  significance,  it  appears  hard  to  explain  how 
Homer  came  to  combine  the  two  ideas,  except  by  sup- 
posing that  his  race  drew  the  association  from  the  same 
early  source  from  which  Moses  and  the  earlier  descend- 
ants of  Abraham  obtained  it. 

It  is  true  that  Homer  nowhere  recognizes  the  relation 


1  Od.  xviii.  7. 

y  II.  xxiv.  333  seqq. 


2  II.  xx.  4. 

4  Genesis  ix.  12-15. 


334 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


of  the  Messenger-Goddess  to  the  rainbow.  He  does 
not,  even  on  any  high  occasion,  assign  to  her  an  epithet 
of  color.  But  this  is  precisely  of  a  piece  with  his 
manner  of  separating  the  deities  of  his  anthropomor- 
phic system  from  the  mere  Nature-Powers  of  other 
theogonies  :  his  Zeus  from  the  Air,  his  Apollo  from  the 
Sun,  his  Artemis  from  the  Moon.  Iris  as  the  Rainbow 
would  have  been  wholly  out  of  place  in  Olympos. 

This  separation  from  the  older  deities  he  has  marked, 
in  the  case  of  Iris,  after  a  most  curious  fashion.  In  the 
Twenty-third  Iliad,1  she  carries  to  the  palace  of  Ze- 
phuros  the  prayer  of  Achilles  for  a  Wind  to  consume 
the  pyre  of  Patroclos.  She  finds  the  Winds  at  table, 
and  they  eagerly  solicit  her  to  sit  and  feast  with  them. 
She  answers  that  she  has  not  time  :  if  she  tarries,  she 
will  lose  her  share  of  a  banquet  which  the  Ethiopians 
are  just  about  to  provide  in  their  country  for  the  Immor- 
tals. This  want  of  time  is  evidently  an  excuse  devised 
by  good  manners :  in  truth,  the  higher  deity  of  the 
Olympian  order  will  not  stoop  to  keep  company  with 
the  mere  agents  of  Nature.  And  this,  although  Homer 
has  given  them  animation,  for  Boreas  is  the  Sire  of  the 
Trojan  mares.2  His  impersonation,  then,  was  not  a 
human  one,  like  that  of  the  Olympian  system. 

In  the  case  just  mentioned,  the  prayer  of  Achilles 
is  addressed  to  the  Winds.  But  apparently  the  Poet 
does  not  allow  them  the  faculty  of  hearing  when  they 
are  invoked  ;  for  it  is  Iris  who,  spontaneously  it  appears, 
charges  herself  with  the  supplication,  and  in  the  char- 
acter of  metanggelos,  inter-messenger,  carries  it  to 
them. 


i  198-212. 


2  II.  xx.  223. 


THE  DIVINITIES  OP  OLYMPOS. 


335 


In  one 1  other  case,  when  she  appears  to  Helen,  and 
exhorts  her  to  repair  to  the  Wall  of  Troy,  no  one  is 
named  as  sending  her ;  but  as  she  has  here  the  title  of 
messenger  expressly  attached  to  her  name,  it  is  prob- 
able that  we  are  to  understand  she  is  despatched  by 
Zeus. 

When,  however,  Aphrodite  is  wounded  by  Diomed, 
in  the  Fifth  Iliad,  Iris  comes  to  her  assistance,2  and 
here,  without  doubt  because  her  action  is  spontaneous, 
she  is  not  called  messenger.  She  drives  the  chariot  of 
Ar£s,  which  carries  the  wounded  goddess  to  Olympos. 

Though  Iris  hears  prayer,  she  does  not  appear  to  be 
an  object  of  worship,  and  her  spontaneous  action  is 
confined  to  the  business  of  the  gods.  It  serves  perhaps 
additionally  to  mark  her  Hellenic  character  that,  when 
she  appears  to  Achilles,  she  is  without  disguise,  and  is 
addressed  by  him  in  her  proper  character  ; 3  but  when 
she  addresses 4  Priam  it  is  with  the  voice  of  Polites, 
and  she  comes 5  before  Helen  in  the  character  of  her 
sister-in-law  Laodike.  When  she  carries  the  order  of 
Zeus  to  Priam,  in  the  Twenty-fourth  Book,  she  an- 
nounces herself  as  the  messenger  of  Zeus,  but  there  is 
no  proof  or  even  sign  of  his  being  acquainted  with  her 
personally.6 

Her  mission  to  Achilles  is  remarkable,  because  she 
is  sent  by  Here.  In  this  instance  alone,  she  obeys  the 
order  of  a  deity  other  than  Zeus.7  It  is  one  of  the 
instances  in  which  Here  exhibits  a  command  over 
aerial  phenomena,  apparently  in  virtue  of  her  wifehood  ; 


i  II.  iii.  121. 
4  II.  ii.  791. 
7  II.  xviii.  168. 


2  353,  365. 
5  II.  iii.  121. 


3  II.  xviii.  182. 
6  II.  xxiv.  173. 


336 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


and  it  bears  an  independent  witness  to  the  connection 
between  Iris  and  the  rainbow. 

'  In  every  other  case  (I  think)  Iris  is  sent  personally 
by  Zeus,  from  the  message  for  Priam  in  the  Second 
Book  of  the  Iliad,  to  those  for  Thetis 1  and  Priam  in  the 
Twenty-fourth. 

By  much  the  most  important  errand  with  which  she 
is  intrusted  is  the  mission  to  Poseidon  in  the  Fifteenth 
Iliad,  where  she  carries  the 'order  for  his  withdrawal 
from  the  field  of  battle.  Supporting  it  with  skill  and 
persuasiveness,  she  by  these  means  induces  him  to 
obey.2 

Section  XXI.  Thetis. 

Thetis  is  not  to  be  regarded  as  properly  an  Olympian 
deity  in  the  restricted  sense  of  the  phrase  ;  yet  by 
reason  of  her  great  influence  in  the  Iliad,  she  is  enti- 
tled to  a  marked  position  of  her  own. 

The  origin  of  Thetis  in  Homer  is  elemental  only, 
and  her  attributes  as  a  goddess  are  feeble.  She  does 
not  act  upon  the  course  of  Nature  ;  she  does  not  influ- 
ence the  mind :  her  powers  of  knowledge  and  vision 
are  limited ;  she  deplores  her  own  lot  among  the  Im- 
mortals ;  she  is  subject  to  weeping  ;  she  was  married 
to  Peleus  much  against  her  will.  In  no  single  instance 
throughout  the  Iliad  does  she  exercise  any  divine  power: 
nor  is  there  in  the  Poem  the  faintest  sign  of  worship  as 
paid  to  her  in  any  place. 

But  while  her  power,  strictly  so  called,  is  thus 
bounded,  her  influence  and  consequence  are  immense. 
She  is  the  pet  deity  of  the  Poet ;  or  rather  the  engine 


1  II.  xxiv.  77, 143. 


2  II.  xv.  157-219. 


THE  DIVINITIES  OF  OLYMPOS. 


337 


he  has  chosen  to  carry  through  his  theurgic  process. 
It  is  her  request  to  Hephaistos,  that  in  a  moment  sets 
him  to  work  upon  the  arms  for  Achilles  ;  and  when,  in 
answer  to  the  summons  of  Zeus,  she  repairs  to  Olym- 
pos,  she  is  received  with  an  extraordinary  respect.  But 
the  chief  act  performed  by  her  is  the  exercise  of  influ- 
ence over  Zeus  in  the  First  Book,  where  she  overcomes 
his  undisguised  reluctance  to  act,  growing  out  of  his 
fears  of  a  conjugal  quarrel ;  and  obtains  his  assent  to 
her  petition  or  demand,  that  the  Trojans  may  prevail 
in  the  war,  until  the  Greeks  shall  have  made  full  rep- 
aration to  her  son  Achilles.1 

This  is  termed  Qataiog  dorj ; 2  a  prayer  lying  outside 
the  provisions  of  destiny  and  the  moral  order,  or  one 
which  caused  them  to  vary  from  their  course.  The 
meaning  of  the  phrase  is  not  hard  to  discover.  The 
cause  of  the  Trojans  in  the  war  was  radically  unjust. 
The  moral  law  required  their  discomfiture.  In  this 
channel  ran  the  main  stream  of  justice  and  of  Provi- 
dence. The  request  of  Thetis  was  not  in  itself  unjust, 
for  her  son,  who  had  so  powerfully  fought  for  the  just 
cause,  had  been  deeply  wronged  by  Agamemnon,  the 
head  of  the  Greeks.  But  it  tended  to  delay  the  con- 
summation of  a  greater  justice  in  a  world-wide  quarrel ; 
and  for  a  time  it  set  aside  the  moral  purpose  of  divine 
government.  Interposing  a  secondary  obstacle,  it  de- 
flected the  current  from  its  course  ;  and  an  immense 
influence  must  be  supposed  to  have  been  possessed  by 
Thetis,  who,  and  who  alone,  by  her  personal  interven- 
tion, produced  this  extraordinary  effect. 

While  she  is  thus  a  deity  of  far  greater  importance 


1  II.  i.  505-510. 


22 


2  II.  xv.  598. 


338 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


than  her  rank  in  the  preternatural  order  would  lead  us 
to  suppose  ;  there  is  no  personage,  either  sublunary  or 
celestial,  that  appears  to  bear  more  or  deeper  marks  of 
the  moulding  hand  of  the  Poet.  Some  find  in  her  only 
a  transposition  of  the  primitive  but  obsolete  deity 
Tethus,  the  wife  of  old  Okeanos.  Her  name  Thetis 
also  appears  to  be  found  in  the  deti  of  the  Albanian 
tongue,  meaning  the  sea.1  On  the  other  hand,  as  one 
of  some  thirty  or  forty  daughters  of  Nereus,  himself  an 
elemental  god,  though  practically  superseded  by  Posei- 
don, there  is  really  no  regular  place  for  her  in  Olympos. 
She  has  all  the  appearance  of  a  character  shaped  and 
turned  to  account  for  the  purposes  of  the  Poem :  while, 
at  the  same  time,  there  are  functions  ascribed  to  her 
which  seem  to  imply  a  higher  parentage  than  that 
assigned  to  her,  and  to  support  the  hypothesis  which 
makes  her  a  reflection,  as  it  were,  of  an  older  deity. 
For  though,  of  the  regular  Olympian  divinities,  Aphro- 
dite is  among  the  lowest,  she  is  expressly  declared  to  be 
of  a  higher  order  than  Thetis.2 

In  her  marriage  to  Peleus,  there  is  nothing  that  re- 
sembles the  clandestine  or  lawless  and  transitory  con- 
nections with  mortals,  that  are  ascribed  to  Demeter,  to 
Aphrodite,  and  to  the  Nymphs.  It  is  the  result  of 
solemn  divine  Counsel,3  and  it  is  celebrated  by  the 
whole  Olympian  Court.  She  had  habitually  sat4  as 
Queen  in  the  palace  of  Phthie,  and  in  the  discharge  of 
her  motherly  cares  she  had  supplied  Achilles  with  a 
chest  of  garments  for  the  war.5  Though  at  first  sight 
the  birth  of  Achilles  may  seem  to  be  the  counterpart 


i  Halm,  Alban.  Studien.  p.  252. 
3  II.  xviii.  85  ;  xxiv.  59. 
5  II.  xvi.  221-224. 


2  II.  xx.  106. 

4  II.  i.  396  ;  xvi.  574. 


THE  DIVINITIES  OF  OLYMPOS. 


339 


of  that  of  iEneas,  they  are  really  opposed  in  every 
feature  :  the  one  is  lawful,  solemn,  permanent  wedlock, 
the  other  occasional  and  secret  lust.  Thetis  herself, 
indeed,  appears  to  have  been  reluctant  at  the  time  to 
marry  Peleus  ;  and  she  rendered  obedience  only  to  an 
order  of  the  gods  in  general. 

The  purpose  of  the  Poet  in  giving  this  high  and  un- 
exampled sanction  to  the  union,  is  not  difficult  to  trace. 
For  her  agency  is  the  hinge  on  which  turns,  in  the  first 
place,  the  reconciliation  of  the  old  and  the  new  The- 
ogonies  ;  in  the  second,  of  the  Pelasgic  and  the  Hel- 
lenic nationalities ;  in  the  third,  of  the  rival  purposes 
of  the  gods  (so  far  as  the  general  scheme  of  Homer 
admitted  them)  with  regard  to  Troy.  I  think  we  may 
find,  that  the  marriage  of  Peleus  to  Thetis  signifies  and 
records  the  union,  both  on  earth  and  in  Olympos,  of 
the  Pelasgian  and  Hellenic  systems. 

The  worship  of  Zeus,  as  we  know,  was  Pelasgian, 
and  therefore  pre-Hellenic.  The  revolt  of  the  three 
great  deities  of  the  new  scheme,  Here,  Athene,  and 
Poseidon,  against  him,  seems  to  signify  the  tendency 
of  the  new  worship,  with  its  anthropomorphic  or  human- 
izing forces,  to  effect  the  overthrow  of  the  former  creed, 
cherished  by  the  older  but  less  intelligent  and  less 
powerful  population.  And  the  pure  Nature-Powers 
indeed  disappear  ;  but  Zeus,  whose  relation  with  Nature 
is  in  its  most  refined  region,  that  of  air,  and  who  repre- 
sents, too,  the  central  principle  of  Theism,  survives  the 
change.  The  agency  employed  for  his  relief  is  that  of 
the  hundred-handed  giant,  called  Briareus  by  the  gods, 
that  is,  in  relation  to  the  old  religion,  but  Aigaion  by 
men,  that  is,  under  the  new.1    It  seems  to  be  in  virtue 


i  II.  i.  403. 


340 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


of  his  being  a  giant  that  he  is  the  son  of  Poseidon  ;  but 
his  having  a  place  both  in  the  old  and  the  new  Theogo- 
nies  evidently  fits  him  to  be  the  reconciler,  and  his 
being  under  the  influence  of  Thetis,  which  is  shown 
by  his  obeying  her  call,  harmonizes  with  her  double 
relation. 

That  relation  is  again  indicated  by  her  good  offices 
to  the  child  Hephaistos,  whose  adoption  into  the  Hel- 
lenic Theogony,  notwithstanding  his  Pelasgian  asso- 
ciations and  his  leaning  to  an  elemental  character,  she 
seems  to  have  procured.1 

And  in  yet  a  third  instance  do  we  find  her  discharg- 
ing a  like  office.  Such  were  the  troubles  excited  by  the 
introduction  of  the  worship  of  Dionusos,  that  it  seems 
to  have  been  all  but  cast  out  of  the  country  ;  but,  as 
we  have  already  seen,  she  gave  him  a  refuge,  which  he 
appears  to  have  requited  with  the  gift  of  a  golden  (or 
gilded)  amphora,  the  work  of  Hephaistos.2 

For  this  office  of  reconciler  between  the  creeds  and 
ideas  of  the  two  nationalities,  she  has  been  carefully 
prepared  by  the  fancy  and  skill  of  the  Poet.  Inde- 
pendently of  the  apparent  association  with  Tethus,  she 
is  rooted  in  the  Pelasgian  system  by  her  owning  Nereus 
for  a  father.  An  ample  counterpoise,  however,  has 
been  provided,  and  in  part  by  a  most  curious  contriv- 
ance. She  is  the  mother  of  Achilles,  who  is  himself 
the  highest  specimen  of  the  pure  Hellenic  type,  and 
whose  Phthian  country  is,  in  a  pre-eminent  sense, 
already  the  land  of  Hellenes  and  Achaians. 

Something,  however,  is  added,  that  the  transition 
may  not  be  too  abrupt,  and  that  an  Hellenic  color  may 

1  II.  xviii.  394-407.    See  sect.  ix.  Hephaistos. 

2  II.  vi.  136.    Od.  xxiv.  73. 


THE  DIVINITIES  OF  OLYMPOS. 


341 


be  made  to  attach  even  to  the  extraction  of  the  great 
hero. 

In  the  Eighteenth  Iliad,1  when  his  mother  issues 
from  the  depths,  she  is  followed  by  a  long  train  of 
sisters ;  and  the  names  of  no  less  than  thirty-three  of 
them  are  given  in  a  string.  No  catalogue  of  names 
approaching  to  this  length  is  to  be  found  anywhere  in 
Homer.  The  nearest  to  it  is  in  the  Eighth  Odyssey, 
where  he  describes  his  Phaiakes  repairing  to  their 
Games.2  Here  he  gives  in  rapid  succession  the  proper 
names  of  sixteen  youths  of  Scherie.  On  examination, 
we  find  that  every  one  of  them  has  relation  to  ships 
and  navigation.  It  is  therefore  evident  that  the  long 
list  has  a  meaning.  He  desires  to  illustrate  the 
especial,  if  not  exclusive,  devotion  of  the  people  to 
nautical  pursuits.  Now,  on  examining  in  a  similar 
manner  the  catalogue  of  Nereids,  we  find  that  their 
names,  instead  of  being,  as  is  often  the  case  with  his 
Immortals,  of  an  etymology  that  cannot  be  ascertained, 
are  in  nearly  every  instance  pure  Hellenic  appellations, 
and  that  they  even  include  the  name  Doris.3  It  is  ex- 
tremely difficult  to  suppose  that  Homer  should  have 
deviated  so  widely  from  his  usual  practice  as  to  these 
lists,  without  a  reason.  And  the  reason  seems  to  be 
obvious  ;  namely,  his  desire  to  give  a  sort  of  Hellenic 
character  to  the  family  of  Nereus,  (whose  name  he 
never  introduces  except  once  in  the  patronymic,)  as 
the  maternal  ancestry  of  Achilles. 

From  the  obligations  thus  conferred,  Thetis  is  in 
a  condition  to  use  urgency,  though  not  authority,  with 
Zeus ;  and  honor  is  done  to  her  son  at  the  expense  of 


i  II.  xviii.  39-49. 


2  Od.  viii.  111-116. 


3  II.  xviii.  45. 


342 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


the  Greek  army,  notwithstanding  the  murmurs  and 
devices  of  the  Hellenizing  deities.  In  like  manner, 
she  has  no  difficulty  in  obtaining  from  Hephaistos,  on 
a  similar  ground,  the  gift  of  the  Arms.  In  each  case  it 
is  not  a  mere  act  of  grace  and  favor,  but  the  requital  of 
a  benefit  received.  In  the  case  of  Zeus,  it  is  the  more 
noteworthy,  because  the  prayer  of  Thetis  is  declared  to 
be  in  the  nature  of  a  deviation  from  the  appointed 
course  of  destiny,1  which  had  long  ago  fixed  the  down- 
fall of  Troy.2  And  again  he  signifies  his  attachment 
to  her,  when,  though  most  of  the  gods  recommended 
that  the  body  of  Hector  should  be  removed  by  stealth, 
he  arranges  that  she  shall  have  an  opportunity  of 
giving  glory  anew  to  her  son,  by  advising  him  to  accept 
the  ransom  3  which  is  to  be  offered  by  Priam. 

The  other  principal  particulars  given  us  respecting 
Thetis  are  as  follows. 

During  the  action  of  the  Poem  she  habitually  resides 
with  '  the  old  man  her  father,'  in  the  depths.  We  may 
suppose  that  this  was  because  she  was  now  released 
from  any  direct  maternal  duties  in  the  house  of  Peleus. 

Her&  was  her  nurse ;  and  was  the  special  designer 
of  the  marriage.4  Here  again  we  observe  the  meeting 
of  Hellenic  and  Pelasgic  elements.  The  undisguised 
reluctance  of  the  bride 5  may  have  been  due  to  her  pre- 
vision of  the  time  when  Peleus  her  husband  would  be 
overtaken  by  old  age  ;  but  I  rather  think  it  may  have 
been  inserted  by  Homer  in  order  to  separate  the  case 
of  Thetis  broadly  from  those  of  Demeter  and  Aphro- 
dite. 

She  has  an  union  of  strong  human  affections  with 

i  II.  xv.  598.  2  II.  ii.  305-330.  3  II.  xxiv.  107-111. 

4  II.  xxiv.  60.  5  II.  xviii.  434. 


THE  DIVINITIES  OF  OLYMPOS. 


343 


the  fainter  attributes  of  deity.  Besides  what  we  have 
already  seen,  she  hears  from  beneath  the  prayer  of 
Achilles,  but  then  he  offers  it  from  the  shore,  and 
looking  seawards.1  She  also  hears  his  wail  over  Pa- 
troclos  ;  but  it  was  an  awfully  loud  one.2  She  herself 
joined  in  the  audible  lament.3  She  was  aware  of  his 
appointed  destiny,4  but  was  under  the  necessity  of 
applying  to  him  to  know  the  cause  of  his  grief.  So 
at  least  she  asserts,  though  her  own  son  seems  to  con- 
tradict her.5  She  suggests  to  him  to  seek  comfort  in 
sensual  indulgence.6  In  his  sorrow,  however,  she 
watches  over  him  night  and  day,  besides  inspiring  him 
with  courage  for  the  field.7  And  when  summoned  to 
Olympos  in  the  matter  of  Hector's  ransom,  she  appears 
there  in  deep  mourning.8 

Upon  entering  the  divine  Assembly,  she  is  received 
with  the  utmost  deference,  Athen&  yielding  her  place 
by  Zeus,  which  Thetis  takes.9  This  may  be  a  proceed- 
ing of  delicate  courtesy,  having  reference  either  to  her 
sorrowing  state,  or  more  probably  to  the  honorable 
customs  of  hospitality. 

On  repairing  to  Hephaistos  to  obtain  the  Arms,  she 
dispatches  her  sisters  to  inform  old  Nereus  of  what  had 
happened.10  When  the  gift  is  ready,  she  herself,  de- 
scending like  a  falcon  from  Olympos,  carries  the  Arms 
to  the  tent  of  Achilles.11 

The  point  of  the  sea,  at  which  she  dwells  with  her 
father,  is  between  Samothrace  and  Imbros.12 


i  II.  i.  348-351.       2  n.  xviii.  35. 
4  II.  i.  416-418;  xviii.  95. 
6  H.  xxiv.  130. 

8  II.  xxiv.  93.  9  II.  xxiv.  100. 
u  II.  xviii.  616 ;  xix.  3. 


3  II.  xviii.  37,  71,  et  alibi. 
5  II.  i.  363,  365  ;  xviii.  63. 
7  II.  xxiv.  72  ;  xix.  37. 
w  II.  xviii.  139-147. 
i2  H.  xxiv.  78. 


344 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


She  came  once  more  to  the  camp  on  the  yet  more 
sorrowful  occasion  of  the  death  of  Achilles.1  She  then 
appointed  the  great  contest  between  Ajax  and  Odysseus 
for  the  arms  of  the  departed  hero.2  She  supplied  the 
famous  urn,  to  receive  his  ashes ;  which  was  the  work 
of  Hephaistos,  and  the  gift  of  Dionusos.  She  also 
supplied  the  prizes  for  the  funeral  games,8  which  she 
obtained  from  the  other  gods,  more  richly  endowed,  as 
is  probable  according  to  the  idea  of  the  Poems,  than 
herself. 

The  epithets  applied  to  Thetis  are  generally  con- 
nected with  her  marine  extraction,  and  of  these  Argu- 
ropeza,  the  silver-footed,  is  the  most  characteristic ;  or 
else  they  relate  to  her  good  disposition. 

She  is  plainly  not  an  Olympian  deity  in  the  sense  of 
belonging  to  the  ordinary  Assembly.  Of  this  her  recep- 
tion as  a  guest  in  the  Twenty-fourth  Book  appears  to 
be  a  positive  sign  ;  and  it  is  in  harmony  with  all  that 
we  can  see  of  her  origin. 

Most  of  the  later  tradition  respecting  Thetis  appears 
to  be  but  arbitrary  comment  and  embellishment.  The 
authentic  data  are  few.  She  had  a  temple,  according 
to  Strabo,  between  Old  and  New  Pharsalos,  in  Thes- 
saly ;  doubtless  owing  to  traditions  of  local  worship, 
which  had  grown  out  of  the  distinguished  honors 
assigned  her  in  the  Poems.4  Pausanias  mentions  a 
case  in  which,  during  the  Messenian  wars,  a  priestess 
of  Thetis,  named  Cleo,  was  taken  and  found  to  have 
in  her  possession  an  ancient  wooden  statue  of  the 
deity.  This  appears  to  have  been  the  only  temple  to 
her  which  existed  south  of  Thessaly  ; 5  but  there  was 

1  Od.  xxiv.  47,  55.  2  Od.  xi.  546.  3  Od.  xxiv.  85. 

4  Strabo,  ix.  p.  431.         5  Paus.  iii.  14,  4. 


THE  DIVINITIES  OF  OLYMPOS. 


345 


a  tale  of  a  statue  of  her,  planted  by  Menelaos  over 
against  Cranae;,1  on  his  return  from  his  wanderings. 
It  is  not  improbable  that,  after  the  Troica,  there  may 
have  been  tendencies  to  establish  this  worship,  and 
that  they  were  afterwards  effaced  from  the  want  of  a 
sufficient  basis  for  such  a  divinity.  Hesiod  adds  noth- 
ing to  the  Homeric  account.2 

I  cannot  help  leaning  to  the  belief  that,  whether  she 
is  or  is  not  a  transformation  of  Tethus,  she  is,  in 
most  of  what  we  hear  of  her,  a  creation  of  Homer  for 
the  purposes  of  his  work ;  and  that,  as  the  Poet  of 
Greece,  engaged  in  building  up  her  nationality  and 
religion,  he  has  employed  her  as  a  most  effective  in- 
strument for  signifying  that  union  of  ethnical  and 
theogonic  elements,  which  he  in  part  commemorated, 
and  in  part  brought  about. 

With  reference  to  the  etymology  of  her  name,  it  is 
perhaps  worthy  of  remark  that  the  only  office  of  media- 
tion at  all  resembling  hers  is  ascribed  to  Tethus,  who, 
with  her  husband  Okeanos,  gives  shelter  and  nurture 
to  Here,3  at  the  great  crisis  when  Zeus  was  thrusting 
his  father  Kronos  down  to  the  Underworld.4 

i  Paus.  xx.  2.         2  Theog.  244,  1006.  3  D>  xiv.  201-204. 

4  It  would  be  matter  of  great  interest  to  know  how  far,  apart  from 
any  theory,  the  names  of  the  Hellenic  divinities  are  really  derivable 
from  the  Sanscrit :  and  in  the  recent  work  of  M.  Jacolliot,  La  Bible 
dans  VInde,  a  list  of  many  of  them  is  given  with  Sanscrit  roots,  in 
many  cases  seemingly  appropriate.  But  for  one  ignorant,  like  myself, 
of  that  language,  this  etymology  must  rest  upon  authority  :  and  the 
general  propositions  of  M.  Jacolliot's  work  are  not  sufficiently  re- 
strained and  circumspect  at  once  to  inspire  confidence  in  his  judg- 
ments. 


CHAPTER  IX. 


Further  Sketch  and  Moral  Aspects  of  the 
Olympian  System. 

I.  Various  Orders  of  Preternatural  Beings. 

I  have  dwelt  largely  on  the  Olympian  Deities.  The 
goddess  Thetis  has  received  a  separate  supplemental 
notice,  on  account,  not  of  her  mythological  rank,  but 
of  her  essential  share  in  the  machinery,  both  human 
and  theogonic,  of  the  Iliad.  Also  it  is  essential  to  give 
some  attention  to  the  deities  or  impersonations  con- 
nected with  Duty,  Doom,  and  Justice.  With  respect 
to  all  other  preternatural  figures  appearing  in  the 
Poems,  it  will  nearly  suffice  to  present  their  names 
according  to  the  classification  which  has  been  already 
stated. 

1.  The  Nature-Powers  :  — 

Okeanos:  the  source  of  deities  (dsmv  ysveaig). 

II.  xiv.  201. 
Tethus :  the  mother  of  deities.    II.  xiv.  201. 

These  two  were  married,  but  estranged.  II.  xiv.  206. 
It  is  probable  that  Homer  intends  by  these  expres- 


THE  OLYMPIAN  SYSTEM. 


34T 


sions  to  represent  Okeanos  and  Tethus  as  the  general 
parents  of  the  various  dynasties  of  gods  ;  and  it  can 
only  be  from  a  supreme  respect  to  Okeanos  that,  when 
all  other  Rivers  are  summoned  to  the  Great  Olympian 
Assembly,  he  alone  is  not  called,1  because  he  could 
not  appear  there  in  his  proper  place,  as  head  and  Sire 
of  all. 

Gaia.  In  the  Underworld.  The  word  means  Land, 
rather  than  Earth. 

Nereus.  In  the  sea.  Never  expressly  named ;  but 
only  called  '  the  aged  father  of  Thetis,'  and  signified 
in  the  Patronymic  of  Nereides. 

Kronos  and  Rhea.  In  Tartaros.  Welcker  thinks 
that  Kronos  (Time)  is  a  mythical  reflection  from 
the  conception  of  Zeus,  who  alone  has  in  Homer 
the  title  of  Kronides.  Rhea  he  takes,  as  kindred 
to  Era,2  to  be  an  Earth-goddess  of  one  of  the  old 
associated  races  of  the  Greek  Peninsula.  Rhea  is 
clearly  placed  in  association  with  Okeanos  and 
Tethus,  by  her  delivering  over  Here  to  their 
care. 

Amphitrite,  the  moaning  sea  (dydarovog),  is  men- 
tioned in  the  Odyssey;  in  a  very  faint  personifi- 
cation. In  later  mythology,  she  becomes  a  wife  of 
Poseidon.  The  passages  where  she  is  named,  as 
well  as  the  fact  that  she  is  only  named  in  this 
poem,  will  admit  of  our  referring  her  to  the  circle 
of  Phoenician  traditions.3 

2.  The  Minor  Nature-Powers  :  — 

The  Rivers  :  of  whom  are  specially  named  — 
Xanthos  or  Scamandros.    II.  xx.  74. 


1  II.  xx.  7.  2  Welcker,  i.  143  ;  ii.  216. 

3  Od.  iii.  91 ;  v.  422  ;  xii.  60,  97. 


348 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


Asopos.    Od.  xi.  260. 
Spercheios.    II.  xxiii.  144. 
Alpheios.    II.  xi.  728. 
Enipeus.    Od.  xi.  238. 
Axios.    II.  xxi.  141,  157. 

The  Nymphs  — 

Daughters  of  Zeus.  II.  vi.  420.  Od.  vi. 
105.  . 

The  Mountain  Nymphs.    II.  vi.  420. 

The  Grove  Nymphs.    II.  xx.  8. 

The  Fountain  Nymphs.  II.  xiv.  444;  xx. 
384;  xx;  9.    Od.  xiii.  356. 

The  Meadow  Nymphs.    II.  xx.  9. 

The  Nymph  Abarbaree.    II.  vi.  22. 

Worship  of  Nymphs.    Od.  xiv.  435. 

Their  Altar.    Od.  xvii.  211. 
The  Nymphs  mentioned  thus  far  are  named  as 
having  been  summoned  to  the  Great  Olympian 
Assembly. 

The  Nymphs  of  the  Sun,  Lampetie  and  Phae- 
thousa.  Od.  xii.  132.  Their  mother  is 
Neaira.    Od.  xii.  133. 

The  Nereids,  sisters  of  Thetis,  dwelling  in  the 
sea.    II.  xviii.  38. 
The  Winds  :  never  admitted  to  Olympos  ;  but  wor- 
shipped ;  viz. 

Zephuros.    II.  xxiii.  195,  200,  208. 

Boreas.    II.  xx.  223  ;  xxiii.  195,  208. 

(Notos  and  Euros  are  not  mentioned  as  sepa- 
rate impersonations.) 

3.  Mythological  Personages  of  the  Outer,  or  Phoeni- 
cian Sphere. 

Helios,  father  of  Aietes  and  Kirke.    Od.  x.  138. 
Kirke.    Od.  x.  136. 


THE  OLYMPIAN  SYSTEM. 


349 


Calypso,  daughter  of  Atlas.    Od.  i.  52. 
Ino  Leucothee.    Od.  v.  333.   A  deified  mortal.  Pro- 
teus.   Od.  iv.  385.    Declared  to  belong  to  Egypt. 
Atlas,  the  Pillar-bearer,  and  sea  explorer.    Od.  i.  52. 
Maias,  mother  of  Hermes.    Od.  xiv.  435. 
Thoosa.    Od.  i.  71. 

Phorcus.    Od.  i.  72.    '  Ruler  of  the  sea  : '  in  relations 

with  Poseidon  through  his  daughter  Thoosa. 
Aietes,  brother  of  Kirke.    Od.  x.  137. 
Perse,  mother  of  Kirke  and  Aietes.    Od.  x.  139. 
Aiolos.    Od.  x.  2.    A  semi-deified  mortal. 
The  Sirens  :  two  in  number.    Od.  xii.  52. 

4.  The  Rebellious  Powers  are  — 

Kronos  (probably).    II.  xiv.  203. 
Titans  (perhaps).    II.  xiv.  279. 
The  Giants.    Od.  vii.  59,  60. 
Tituos.    Od.  xi.  576.  • 
Otos  and  Ephialtes.    Od.  xi.  305  seqq. 

But  it  is  not  easy  to  distinguish  in  all  cases  between 
powers  rebellious,  and  powers  simply  deposed  or  super- 
seded. 

Passages  relating  to  the  punishment  of  rebellious 
powers,  according  to  the  Sacred  or  Hebrew  tradition, 
are  to  be  found  in  Job  xxvi.  5 ;  Prov.  ii.  18,  xxi.  16 ; 
cf.  Gen.  vi.  4,  5  ;  in  2  Pet.  ii.  4,  5  ;  Wisd.  xiv.  6  ; 
Ecclus.  xvi.  7 ;  Baruch  iii.  26,  28. 

5.  Ministers  of  Doom. 

Ate. 
Erinues. 

Moira,  Moirai,  Aisa,  Kataclothes. 
These  will  be  mentioned  severally. 


350 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


6.  Poetical  Impersonations. 

The  Muses,  daughters  of  Zeus :  their  number  is  only 
mentioned  by  Homer  in  Od.  xxiv.  60.  The  invoca- 
tion is  most  commonly  in  the  singular.  They  are, 
however,  nine  in  all. 

The  Fates  (Keres,  Cataclothes). 

The  Prayers  (with  Ate). 

Ossa,  Pumor.    II.  ii.  93  ;  Od.  xxiv.  413. 

Deimos,  Terror.  II.  iv.  440,  xxi.  37,  xv.  119.  Prob- 
ably son  of  Ares. 

Phobos,  Panic.   Ibid.   A  son  of  Ares.   II.  xiii.  299. 

Kudoimos,  Tumult.    Attends  upon  Enuo.    II.  v.  593. 

Eris,  Discord.    II.  v.  740.    See  supra,  Chap.  VIII. 

Oneiros,  Dream.    II.  ii.  6-54. 

Hupnos,  Sleep.    II.  xiv.  231. 

Thanatos,  Death.    II.  xiv.  231,  xvi.  454,  682. 

Alke,  Might.    II.  v.  740. 

Ioke,  Rout.    II.  v.  740. 

Arpuiai :  the  Storm-winds.  Od.  i.  241  ;  repeated 
xiv.  371,  xx.  77;  cf.  63.  Of  these  Podarge  is 
named  as  the  mother ;  who  bears  to  Zephuros  the 
two  immortal  horses  of  Achilles,  Xanthos  and  Ba- 
lios. 

II.  The  Erinues. 

There  are  three  chief  descriptions  of  preternatural 
force  recognized  in  the  Homeric  Poems. 

1.  The  will  and  power  of  the  Olympian  deities. 

2.  The  binding  efficacy  of  Destiny. 

3.  The  obligations  of  the  moral  order. 

The  first  of  them  may  be  described,  from  its  mixed 
character  of  truth  and  fable,  as  the  Theomythology  of 
the  Poet. 


THE  OLYMPIAN  SYSTEM. 


351 


The  second  is  his  Necessitarianism. 
The  third  is  his  Deontology. 

But  none  of  these  are  scientifically  set  forth  or 
viewed ;  and  no  one  of  them  has  an  exclusive  sway. 

In  the  first,  a  personal  will  is  everywhere  apparent ; 
and  though  this  will  is  largely  used  in  sustaining  moral 
ideas,  yet  with  them  are  mixed  mere  propensities  and 
partialities,  and  even  passions  and  vices. 

In  the  second  and  third,  personality  and  will  are 
thrown  into  the  background.  As  his  first  rests  on 
6  shall,'  so  the  second  is  based  on  the  idea  we  convey 
by  6  must ; '  but  the  third  is  founded  on  4  ought.' 

The  second,  if  absolute,  is  perhaps  among  the  most 
immoral  and  degrading  of  all  philosophical  systems ; 
but  those,  who  have  given  it  a  logical  assent,  have 
seldom  adopted  it  as  the  rule  of  life  ;  •  and  in  Homer  it 
has  only  a  very  limited  range.  It  is  rarely  held  up  to 
us  apart  from  some  reference  either  to  the  personal  will 
of  the  gods,  or  to  the  moral  order ;  and  it  never  appears 
as  the  single,  ultimate,  overruling  force. 

The  third  corresponds  with  the  second  in  its  gener- 
ally, though  not  invariably,  impersonal  character  ;  and 
the  ideas  belonging  to  the  two  respectively  are  some- 
times mixed  in  the  words  iioTqcl,  which  leans  however 
to  the  idea  of  force,  and  aha  and  daipcov,  which  con- 
tain more  of  the  moral  element.  There  is  also  a 
relation  between  the  idea  of  Zeus,  and  that  of  Fate, 
exhibited  in  the  remarkable  phrase  Aioq  aha,  the  fate 
of,  that  is,  proceeding  from,  Zeus. 

But  in  the  rear  of  this  law  of  the  great  Ought,  or  the 
moral  order  of  the  Universe,  there  is  a  personal  agency, 
which  in  Homer  is  principally  charged  with  enforcing 
its  observance  ;  that  namely  of  the  'Egtvveg.    With  the 


852 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


progress  of  time,  and  the  growth  of  moral  corruption, 
the  function  of  these  venerable  ministers  of  Eight 
comes  more  and  more  to  be,  not  enforcing  the  observ- 
ance, or  repairing  the  breach,  but  simply  punishing  the 
offender  ;  and  they  themselves  gradually  assume  the 
power  of  Furies,  dressed  in  every  imaginable  horror. 
The  later  pictures  of  them  are  coarse  and  vulgar,  com- 
pared with  the  awful  yet  noble  figures  of  the  Erinues 
of  Homer,  in  whom  is  really  represented,  more  than  in 
Zeus  himself,  the  idea  of  an  ultimate  Divine  Judgment, 
together  with  compensating  and  rectifying  powers. 

The  action  of  the  Erinues  is  to  a  certain  extent 
mixed  with  that  of  the  subterranean  or  avenging  gods. 
When  the  father  of  Phoenix  prays  the  Erinues  to  make 
him  childless,  the  imprecation  is  fulfilled  by  '  the  gods, 
and  (or  namely)  the  nether  Zeus  and  the  awful  Per- 
sephone : '  and  again,  when  Althaia  invokes  these  two 
deities  for  the  punishment  of  Meleagros,  it  is  the 
Erinus  who  from  Erebos  hears,  and  accomplishes,  the 
prayer.1  The  Erinues  are  invoked  by  Agamemnon  to 
witness  to  his  asseverated  oath  concerning  Briseis,  as 
punishers  of  the  perjured  ;  together  with  Zeus,  Gaia, 
and  the  Sun.2  The  Erinues  of  Epicaste  haunt  her 
son  (Edipus.3  In  his  father's  house,  Telemachos  ap- 
prehends that,  should  he  dismiss  his  mother,  her 
Erinues  will  come  upon  him:4  and  Odysseus,  when  the 
Suitor  Antinoos  has  hurled  the  stool  at  him,  invokes 
upon  him  '  if,'  or, 6  for  surely,' '  there  are  such,'  the  gods 
and  Erinues  of  the  poor.5 

The  functions  of  the  Erinues  are  not  confined  to 
mortals.    They  affect  also  the  gods.    When  Ares  is 

i  II.  ix.  449-457  and  565-603.  2  II.  xix.  258-260. 

3  Od.  xi.  279.  4  Od.  ii.  135.  5  Od.  xvii.  475,  476. 


THE  OLYMPIAN  SYSTEM. 


353 


laid  prostrate  in  the  Theomacby,  Athene"  tells  him  his 
fall  is  due  to  the  Erinues  of  his  mother  Here,  whose 
side  he  had  abandoned.1  And,  when  Iris  finds  it  dif- 
ficult to  induce  Poseidon  to  obey  the  behest  of  Zeus 
by  withdrawing  from  the  field  of  battle,  she  reminds 
him  that  the  Erinues  are  with  the  elder.2 

The  horse  Xanthos  receives  a  voice  from  Here,  to 
warn  Achilles  of  his  fate :  when  he  has  done  it,  the 
Erinues  arrest  his  speech.3 

When  Agamemnon  has  to  confess  his  art]  or  sin 
in  the  matter  of  Briseis,  he  says,  '  I  however  am  not 
to  blame,  but  Zeus,  and  Fate,  and  the  Erin  us  that 
stalks  in  cloud.'4 

When  the  daughters  of  Pandareos  have  received  all 
manner  of  gifts  by  the  agency  of  the  gods,  and  Zeus 
is  being  asked  to  find  them  husbands,  instead  of  this, 
the  Harpuiai  or  Hurricanes,  who  are  either  storm-blasts 
or  subordinate  ministers  of  vengeance,  carry  them  off, 
and  deliver  them  to  the  Erinues  to  deal  with.5 

Thus  far,  in  eleven  cases  out  of  the  twelve  in  which 
Homer  introduces  these  remarkable  personages,  they 
evidently  appear  as  the  champions  and  avengers  of 
the  moral  order,  in  all  forms,  and  against  all  persons 
whatever. 

They  are  never  subject  to  the  order  of  any  Deity. 
The  gods  indeed  are  subject  to  control,  or  even  punish- 
ment, by  them.  Zeus  is  never  mentioned  in  this 
relation  :  but  their  office  expressly  reaches  to  Poseidon. 
Their  agency  is  wholly  anterior  to,  and  independent 
of,  all  volition  whatever.     They  represent  Law  in 

1  II.  xxi.  410-414.  2  ii.  xv<  204.  3  n.  xix>  418 

4  II.  xix.  87.  5  od.  xx.  66-78. 

23 


354 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


action.  But,  besides  punishing  offenders,  they  actually 
stop  and  repair  infractions  of  the  moral  or  settled 
constitution  of  the  world,  as  in  the  case  of  the  horse 
Xanthos.  They  therefore  represent  not  only  right  as 
opposed  to  wrong,  but  order  as  opposed  to  disorder  : 
and,  in  this  respect,  they  supply  a  very  characteristic 
product  of  the  symmetrical  mind  of  the  Greeks. 

The  Erinues  of  parents,  of  elders,  of  the  poor,  and  the 
like,  are  the  sanctions  of  those  great  relations,  in  which 
moral  obligation  has  its  roots  for  the  mass  of  men. 

In  the  case  of  the  offence  of  CEdipus,  will  was  not 
concerned :  yet  it  is  enough  for  them  that  law  was 
violated  ;  and  they  appear  in  order  to  avenge  it. 

In  the  case  of  the  orphan  daughters  of  Pandareos, 
it  is  simply  excess  which  they  appear  to  resent.  All 
personal  gifts,  even  their  food,  were  conveyed  to  these 
maidens  by  the  direct  agency  of  deities.  This  abnormal 
provision,  lying  far  beyond,  was  therefore  in  derogation 
of,  the  established  laws  for  the  government  of  the  world  : 
it  left  no  space  for  human  volition,  effort,  or  discipline. 
This  is  the  probable  ground  for  the  remarkable  inter- 
vention of  the  Erinues  against  the  damsels. 

The  twelfth  and  remaining  case  represents  the  close- 
sticking,  or  tenacious,  Eriims1  (daaittfzig)  as  insinuat- 
ing an  At£  or  offence  into  the  mind  of  Melampous. 
Neleus  had  made  it  a  condition  of  obtaining  the  hand 
of  his  daughter  Pero,  that  the  Suitor  should  bring  him 
certain  oxen  of  Iphiclos.  This  Melampous  undertook 
to  do,  on  behalf  not  of  himself  but  of  a  brother ;  though 
it  entailed  a  year's  imprisonment,  which  as  a  Seer  he 
must  be  supposed  to  have  known  beforehand.  We 

Od.  xv.  225-234.  Compare  '  Post  equitem  sedet  atra  cura.'  Hor. 
Od.  3.  1,  40. 


THE  OLYMPIAN  SYSTEM. 


355 


have  to  ask,  in  what  did  the  offence  consist  ?  Was 
it  an  imprudence  or  folly  thus  to  expose  himself  ?  or 
was  the  theft  an  offence  against  the  laws  of  good 
neighborhood  or  guestship  ?  In  either  case  we  do  not 
escape  this  difficulty,  that  it  was  suggested  by  the 
Erinus.  This  is  a  representation  not  easily  brought 
into  accordance  with  any  of  the  other  Homeric  ref- 
erences to  the  Erin ues  :  which,  though  severe  beyond 
the  limits  of  justice,  nowhere  else  appear  as  the  in- 
stigators of  evil.  It  seems  to  be  peculiarly  strange, 
because  of  the  habitual  care  of  the  Erinus  to  maintain 
the  established  order,  and  not  merely  to  punish  the 
breach  of  it. 

It  is  true  that,  in  the  Odyssey,  Athene*  is  said  to 
restrain  the  Suitors  from  discontinuing  their  evil  deeds. 
But  these  are  men  who  had  long  persisted  in  a  prof- 
ligate and  cruel  disregard  of  all  the  laws  of  duty.1 
No  such  consideration  will  apply  to  the  case  of 
Melampous.  Agamemnon,  indeed,  blames  the  Erinus 
for  his  own  fault:  but  this  is  a  mere  excuse.  The 
whole  legend  of  Melampous  is  given  in  a  form  some- 
what cramped ;  and,  like  other  passages  in  the  later 
books  of  the  Odyssey,  suggests  that  it  had  not  been 
fully  wrought  out  by  the  Poet.  Possibly,  but  I  cannot 
say  more  than  possibly,  this  may  account  for  the  mode 
in  which  the  Erinus  is  introduced.  We  may  also 
remark  that  here  only  she  is  called  by  the  name  of 
goddess ;  which  appears  rather  inconsistent  with  her 
position. 

Whether  we  are  to  regard  the  Erinus  as  really 
capable  of  being  a  tempter  or  not,  the  conception 


1  Od.  xviii.  155,  346. 


356  JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 

deviates  from  the  highest  form  of  rectitude  by  ad- 
ministering punishment,  in  the  case  of  (Edipus,  to  an 
involuntary  offence.  But  here  the  elements  of  good 
greatly  preponderate  ;  and  there  is  something  noble  as 
well  as  awful  in  these  beings,  watching  with  so  much 
care  over  constituted  laws,  and  maintaining  or  restor- 
ing the  equilibrium  of  the  moral  world.  It  is  by  an 
immense  declension  that  these  sublime  Erinues  become 
the  savage  Furies  of  the  Latin  Hades.1 

The  name  of  Erinus  is  traced  etymologically  by 
Professor  Max  Miiller  to  the  Sanscrit  Saranyu,  a 
name  of  the  Dawn : 2  which,  as  importing  discovery 
by  means  of  light,  would  connect  it  with  the  'office 
we  have  been  considering. 

III.    Ate,  the  Temptress. 

The  Ate  of  Homer,  as  a  person,  represents  a  Temp- 
tress, who  insinuates  into  the-  mind  error  or  crime, 
begun  in  folly,  and  ending  in  calamity.  Among  the 
later  Greeks  it  is  Calamity  simply,  with  a  shadow  of 
Destiny  hanging  in  the  distance. 

The  Homeric  Ate"  means  and  wishes  ill  to  mortals ; 
but  seems  to  have  no  power  to  hurt  them,  except  it 
be  through  channels  wholly  or  partially  opened  to 
her  by  their  own  erring  or  bewildered  volition.  Even 
Deity  is  not  exempt  from  her  illusions :  for,  before  the 
birth  of  Heracles,3  she  it  is  who  leads  Zeus  to  promise 
what  will,  through  Herd's  craft,  overturn  his  own  most 
dearly  cherished  plans.    For  this  excess  of  daring, 

i  ^En.  vi.  555,  571.  2  Lectures  on  Language,  ii.  484,  516,  562. 

3  II.  xix.  95  seqq. 


THE  OLYMPIAN  SYSTEM. 


357 


Zeus  seizes  her  by  the  hair,  and  hurls  her  from  Olym- 
pos  to  Earth,1  apparently  taken  to  be  her  native  seat. 

For  she2  is  his  eldest  daughter;  his  daughters  too 
are  the  Litai,  or  prayers,  that  lag  behind  her.  She 
is  vigorous  and  nimble,  prowling  about  for  mischief. 
They  are  limping  and  decrepit :  they  cannot  see 
straight  before  them.3  In  this  allegory,  we  have  man 
ready  and  quick  to  err,  slow  to  repent.  We  have 
also  a  living  power  of  Evil  extraneous  to  him,  and 
ever  soliciting  him  to  his  own  loss  and  ruin.  Here  is  a 
picture  in  substance  much  resembling  the  Serpent  of 
the  Book  of  Genesis,  the  Satan  of  Scripture,  and  the 
punishment  he  has  undergone. 

The  temptations  of  Ate  are  to  acts,  also  called  atai, 
variously  shaded  between  folly  and  sheer  crime.  The 
most  innocent  ate  of  Homer  is  perhaps  the  sleep  of 
Odysseus  in  Thrinakie,  during  which  his  crew  con- 
sume the  oxen  of  the  Sun.4  He  may,  indeed,  be  re- 
garded as  in  some  sort  responsible  for  his  comrades: 
yet  he  had  bound  them  by  oath5  not  to  commit  the 
acts. 

We  cannot  be  surprised  if  occasionally  we  find 
moral  government  in  Homer  out  of  joint,  as  in  the 
case  lately  observed,  where  the  Eriniis  is  said  to 
send  an  Ate.6  Agamemnon  complains  that  his  Ate 
was  sent  to  him  by  Zeus,  together  with  Destiny  and 
Eriims  ; 7  but  this  is  an  exhibition  of  a  weak  and  self- 
excusing  character,  rather  than  a  normal  example  of 
the  thought  current  in  that  age. 

i  II.  xix.  126-133.  2  n.  Xix.  91.  3  n.  ix.  499-514. 

4  Od.  xii.  372.  5  Od.  xii.  303.  6  Qd.  xv.  234. 

i  II.  xix.  87. 


358 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


Besides  the  At£  of  Zeus,  of  Agamemnon,  and  of 
Odysseus,  we  have  in  Homer  the  following  chief 
examples : 

Of  Dolon,  II.  x.  391. 

Of  Melampous,  Od.  xv.  233. 

These  are  offences  against  prudence. 
Of  Paris,  II.  vi.  356 ;  xxiv.  28. 
Of  Helen,  Od.  iv.  261;  xxiii.  223. 
Of  the  Manslayer,  II.  xxiv.  480. 

Of  the  drunken  Centaur  Eurution,  Od.  xxi.  295-302. 
These  are  moral  transgressions. 

The  higher  form  of  human  wickedness,  deliberate 
and  self-conscious,  is,  as  we  shall  see,  not  at£  but 
atasthalie\ 

IV.    Fate  or  Doom. 

The  words  used  in  Homer  to. signify  Fate,  Doom, 
and  Destiny,  are  Ker,  also  in  the  plural  Keres ;  Kata- 
clothes  ;  Moira  ;  Aisa  ;  and  Moros. 

Of  these,  Ker  approaches  most  frequently  to  a  distinct 
impersonation ;  has  the  faintest  trace  of  any  moral 
element,  distinct  from  the  mere  machinery  of  an  iron 
system  of  decrees ;  and  is  of  the  darkest  color,  as  it 
always  implies  doom  or  death,  never  a  fated  blessing. 
Ker  again  is  the  destiny  of  an  individual ;  not  of  law 
governing  the  world.  It  is,  however,  on  no  occasion 
eluded  or  contravened. 

The  Kataclothe's  or  Spinners  are  only  mentioned  in 
Od.  vii.  197.  They  are  personal :  and  the  epithet 
6  weighty '  or  6  oppressive  '  is  attached  to  them.  They 
partake  of  the  character  of  the  Keres. 

Neither  of  these  touch  the  great  questions,  how  far 


THE  OLYMPIAN  SYSTEM. 


359 


destiny  overrules  the  human  will,  and  how  far  it  is 
separate  from,  or  even  superior  to,  the  divine  will. 

The  word  Aisa  means  the  destiny  of  a  particular 
person  : 1  or  the  moral  law  for  the  government  of  con- 
duct ; 2  or  that  moral  law  as  proceeding  from  Zeus  or 
Providence  personally,  as  theDios  aisa,3  daimonos 
aisa:  or  lastly  a  separate  power  moving  and  ruling 
affairs.4  In  this  last  and  gravest  sense,  Aisa  is  not  very 
prominently  used.  Again,  it  is  but  rarely  and  faintly 
personified  ;  it  contains  more  of  the  moral  element, 
more  of  ought  than  of  must :  though,  when  used  to  mean 
Death  it  is  irresistible,  because  the  law  of  death  cannot 
be  directly  cancelled.  Otherwise,  it  may  be  overcome. 
In  II.  xvi.  780,  the  Achaians  gain  the  upperhand  against 
the  Trojans,  in  spite  of  Aisa.  But  this  particular 
Aisa  was  no  more  than  the  decree  of  Zeus,  which  gave 
that  one  day  of  success  to  the  fortunes  of  Troy.  The 
dominant  idea  of  Ais  a  generally  is  not  blind  command, 
but  an  ordained  law  of  right:  a  law  without  doubt 
very  liable  to  be  broken. 

Moira,  like  Aisa,  means  an  allotted  share:  but  it 
is  less  ethical,  more  contracted,  and  more  sovereign 
and  resistless.  Moira  deals  with  each  man:  but  we 
scarcely  hear  of  the  Moira  of  a  man.  It  may  mean 
good  fortune,  and  has  this  sense  in  opposition  to  am- 
morie: 5  it  requires  a  darkening  epithet  to  give  it  the 
adverse  sense.6  It  is  however  often  used  for  death. 
It  may  be  the  divine  will  embodied,  as  we  have  the 
Moira  of  the  god,  or  the  gods;7  but  never  of  any 
named  god,  which  seems  to  place  it  somewhat  higher 

i  II.  i.  416.  2  II.  iii.  59.  3  ii.  xvii.  321. 

4  II.  xx.  127  ;  xvi.  441.        5  Od.  xx.  76.  6  n.  xii.  H6. 

i  Od.  iii.  269  ;  xxii.  413. 


360 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


than  Aisa.  Nothing  in  Homer  is  actually  done  con- 
trary to  Moira  :  but  such  things  seem  to  be  regarded 
as  not  beyond  the  bounds  of  possibility.1 

It  is  not  however  incapable  of  receiving  the  moral 
element.  To  speak  generally,  morsimos  is  destined, 
aisimos  is  right.  But  when  Antinoos  is  killed,  he  is 
killed  according  to  Moira,2  that  is  rightly:  and  the 
term  catamoiran  connects  it  with  the  moral  order, 
in  the  sense  of  propriety.3 

In  the  order  of  action,  then,  Moira  is  above  Aisa  ; 
in  the  order  of  law,  below  it. 

Moros  in  Homer  is  never  personified.  Referred  to 
an  individual  it  seems  to  mean  his  death :  and  etymo- 
logically  it  corresponds  with  the  Latin  mors.  It  is 
never  associated  with  the  deity.  But  it  is  like  Ai  s  a  in 
receiving  the  sense  of  the  moral  law.  And  here  it 
corresponds  with  the  Latin  mos,  moris.  For  mortals 
bring  calamity  on  themselves  in  defiance  of  moros,  and 
in  similar  defiance  Aigisthos  commits  his  crimes.4  This 
can  hardly  mean  that  he  was  too  strong  for  Destiny ; 
but  he  was  too  strong  for  Right. 

In  none  of  these  forms  does  Destiny  ever  fight  with 
the  gods  ;  or,  unless  it  be  in  the  shape  of  Death,  defy 
them.  The  later  Greek  mind  elaborated  the  idea  of  a 
Fate  apart  from,  and  higher  than,  the  gods.5  But,  in 
Homer,  not  even  the  human  will  is  controlled  in  such 
a  manner  as  to  suggest  or  sustain  the  Necessitarian 
theory.  Indeed  we  find  the  gods  helping  Destiny  against 
man  :  as  when,  in  the  Second  Iliad,6  the  Greeks  would, 

1  II.  xx.  336.  2  Od.  xxii.  54.  3  II.  x.  169. 

4  Od.  i.  34,  35. 

5  ^sch.  Ag.  993 ;  Herod,  i.  91 ;  Philera.  Fragm.  86. 

6  II.  ii.  155. 


THE  OLYMPIAN  SYSTEM. 


361 


against  M  oros,  have  returned  to  their  country  after  the 
rush  from  the  Assembly,  had  not  Here  urged  Athene" 
to  stay  the  torrent  of  home-sick  emotion  :  and  Apollo 
entered  Troy,  lest  the  Greeks  should  take  it,  against 
Moros,  on  the  day  of  the  fall  of  Hector.1  Nor  is  the 
Fate  of  Homer  absolutely  blind :  on  the  contrary  it 
shows  rather  a  tendency  at  times  to  grow  into  a  sort 
of  rival  Providence,  as  in  6  The  Fates  have  ordained  for 
man  a  hardy  mind.' 2 

And  when,  in  order  to  obtain  a  comprehensive  view 
of  the  field  of  human  action ,  we  turn  to  the  general 
plan  of  the  two  Poems,  we  find  that  in  each  case  they 
work,  not  according  to  the  impulsion  of  a  blind  and 
occult  force,  but  rationally,  towards  the  fulfilment  of 
a  divine  or  Olympian  decree,  announced  at  the  outset, 
and  steadily  pursued  to  the  end.3 

V.  Animal  Worship. 

Although  Animal  worship  has  played  so  considerable 
a  part  in  the  religions  of  the  East,  the  traces  of  it  in 
Homer  are  few,  and,  with  one  exception,  they  are  also 
faint. 

That  exception  is  the  extraordinary  sanctity  attach- 
ing, in  the  Twelfth  Odyssey,  to  the  Oxen  of  the  Sun, 
which  I  have  treated  as  belonging  to  the  Phoenician 
system,  and  as  foreign  to  the  Olympian  religion.4 

Other  traces  seem  to  be  rather  dubiously  discoverable, 
as  follows: 

(a)  The  introduction  of  the  immortal  horses,  Xanthos 

1  II.  xxi.  517.  2  II.  xxiy.  49. 

3  II.  i.  5  ;  iv.  62-64.    Od.  i.  76-79. 

4  See  supra,  Helios,  Chap.  VIII. 


362 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


and  Balios  ;  the  gift  of  speech,  conferred  for  the  mo- 
ment by  Here  on  Xanthos  ;  and,  what  is  of  more 
weight,  the  gift  of  prevision,  which  enabled  him  to 
foretell  his  master's  death.  That  gift  he  did  not  derive 
from  the  goddess.  But,  when  he  had  thus  spoken, 
the  Erinus  interfered  to  arrest  this  violation  of  the 
natural  order.1 

(5)  The  assumption  by  deities  of  the  forms  of  birds  : 
viz.:  — 

By" Athene,  II.  vii.  59  ;  Od.  i.  320,  iii.  372,  xxii.  240. 
Apollo,  II.  vii.  59. 
Hupnos,  II.  xiv.  290. 
Ino  Leucothee  ( Phoenician),  Od.  v.  337. 

(<?)  The  horse  in  Homer  generally  has  not  only  a 
poetical  grandeur,  but  a  near  relation  to  deity,  which 
I  am  unable  sufficiently  to  explain  :  but  which,  it  seems 
possible,  may  be  the  reflection  or  analogue  of  the  place 
assigned  to' the  ox  in  the  East.  Several  circumstances, 
and  among  them  the  practice  of  describing  a  cham- 
paign country  as  one  suited  to  feeding  the  horse,2 
combine  to  show  how  completely,  for  the  Greek,  this 
noble  creature  stood  at  the  head  of  the  animal  crea- 
tion. 

Some  have  pointed  to  qualities  belonging  to  the 
brute  creation  as  the  possible  groundwork  of  the  extra- 
ordinary system  of  religion,  which  regarded  animals  as 
fit  objects  of  worship :  the  unity  and  tranquillity  of 
animal  life,  which  makes  it,  as  it  were,  a  colorless 
medium  for  an  inward  spirit  to  inhabit :  and  the  sin- 

1  II.  xix.  404-418. 

2  II.  ii.  287,  and  in  fourteen  other  places. 


THE  OLYMPIAN  SYSTEM. 


363 


gular  instincts  by  which  it  appears  in  a  manner  to 
apprehend  the  future.1 

For  my  own  part,  I  am  not  able,  even  after  reading 
the  argument  of  the  learned  and  able  Mr.  Davison,2 
to  escape  from  the  belief  that  the  hypothesis  of  a  divine 
command,  given  before  the  races  recorded  in  Scripture 
were  multiplied  and  dispersed,  affords  by  far  the  most 
rational  and  satisfactory  explanation  of  the  wide  ex- 
tension of  the  practice  of  animal  sacrifice,  and  of  its 
remarkable  uniformity  as  between  races  such  as  the 
Hebrews  and  the  Hellenes,  who  had  no  communication 
together,  and  little  indeed  of  anything  in  common.  At 
the  same  time,  it  is  an  hypothesis  only,  and  has  not 
been  demonstrated. 

But  if  mankind  thus  offered  certain  animals  to  their 
gods,  under  what  they  esteemed  a  divine  authority,  it 
is  not  difficult  to  perceive  the  chain  of  association  by 
which  those  animals  might  themselves,  in  process  of 
time,  very  easily  be  taken  for  symbols  of  the  godhead, 
and  might  again,  from  being  mere  symbols,  grow  to 
be  esteemed  the  real  shrines  of  its  glory,  and  thus  to 
attract  the  worship  which  is  its  due. 

VI.     On  the  Modes  of  Approximation  between  the  Divine  and 
the  Human  Nature. 

The  anthropomorphic  principle  of  the  Greek  religion 
found  for  itself,  in  a  spontaneous  manner,  several  dis- 
tinct forms  or  channels  of  development,  for  the  closer 
association  of  the  races  of  gods  and  men. 

1  Dollinger,  Heid.  u.  Jud.  vi.  130,  p.  424. 

2  Inquiry  into  the  Origin  and  Intent  of  Primitive  Sacrifice.  Lon- 
don, 1825. 


364 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


The  deification  of  heroes  and  benefactors  after  death 
appears  before  us  in  Homer  as  begun,  yet,  at  least 
in  the  Olympian  mythology,  as  incomplete.  No  per- 
son, avowedly  of  human  origin,  has  yet  been  advanced 
to  the  rank  of  deity  with  the  full  consequences  both 
of  an  abode  in  heaven,  and  a  worship  on  earth. 

Yet  the  consummation  of  the  processes  imminent. 
All  the  materials  are  prepared  ;  and  all  the  steps  taken, 
except  the  final  one  which  combines  them  into  a  con- 
sistent whole. 

The  elements  of  what  was  soon  to  be  a  system  are 
found  in  Homer  principally  as  follows  :  — 

1.  The  ascription  of  human  forms,  manners,  affec- 
tions, passions,  and  other  qualities,  to  the  gods  in 
general,  lying  at  the  root  of  the  Homeric  mythology 
as  an  anthropomorphic  system,  firmly  lays  the  ground 
for  further  assimilation  and  intercommunion  of  the 
two  orders  of  being. 

2.  Divine  beauty,  strength,  influence,  and  intellect, 
arc  ascribed  freely  in  a  long  list  of  epithets  and  phrases, 
to  the  mortals  most  eminent  for  these  properties  :  and 
even  the  epithet  deTog,  meaning  simply  6  divine,'  is 
attached,  in  the  two  grand  cases  of  the  Protagonists 
Achilles  and  Odysseus,  to  the  living  personages  of  the 
Poems,  and  to  a  larger  number  of  the  most  eminent 
among  the  dead.  This  second  head  of  preparation  is 
as  it  were  the  counterpart  of  the  first. 

3.  Birth  from  a  divine  progenitor,  and  even  from 
a  divine  father,  is  ascribed  to  many  personages  who 
are  active  in  the  Poems,  as  well  as  to  many  who  were 
dead. 

4.  Passion  for  beautiful  or  distinguished  men  is 
freely  ascribed  to  goddesses,  in  a  number  of  instances. 


THE  OLYMPIAN  SYSTEM. 


365 


Among  these  were  some,  especially  Aphrodite  and 
Demeter,  who  were  already  in  part,  and  whom  at  a 
later  date  we  find  fully  and  unequivocally,  adopted  into 
the  Hellenic  religion.  But  it  is  remarkable  that  such 
passion  is  in  no  case  throughout  the  Poems  ascribed 
to  any  of  those  goddesses  who  were  either  the  most 
elevated  or  else  the  most  national :  Here,  Athene,  Leto, 
Artemis.  A  higher  and  purer  idea  of  woman  was 
entertained  among  the  Achaians,  and  reflected  in  their 
religion,  than  in  the  elemental  or  the  oriental  systems. 

5.  More  closely  to  the  purpose  than  anything  that 
has  yet  been  stated,  are  the  instances  of  Ganymede 
and  Cleitos,  translated  to  heaven  and  the  society  of 
the  Immortals  for  their  beauty:1  of  Tithonos,  taken 
up  to  be  the  husband  of  Eos  or  the  morning ;  possibly 
of  Marpessa,  whom  Apollo  '  snatched  up  : ' 2  and  of  Ino 
Leucothee,3  who  locally,  that  is,  in  the  great  sea  region, 
has  from  being  a  mortal  risen  to  the  honors  and 
character  of  deity.  Aiolos,  too,  may  be  considered  as 
nearly  approaching  to  the  character  of  a  deified  Per- 
sonage.4 

These,  indeed,  are  all  foreign,  or  extra -Hellenic, 
traditions.  But  of  Hellenes,  we  have  Castor,  and 
Poludeukes  or  Pollux,  who,  even  while  on  alternate 
days  alive  though  not  among  men,  and  still  in  the 
lower  regions,  yet  have  by  gift  of  Zeus  had  divine 
honors  allotted  to  them:5  and  more  still,  we  have 
Herakles,6  who,  while  his  Wraith  is  in  the  Shades, 
himself  dwells  among  the  gods,  and  has  Hebe,  who 


i  II.  xx.  233.    Od.  xv.  250. 
3  Od.  v.  333-335. 
5  Od.  xi.  298-304. 


2  II.  ix.  564. 
4  Od.  x.  1. 
6  0;!.  xi.  601. 


366 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


is  apparently  a  goddess  proper,  assigned  to  him  for 
his  mate. 

6.  We  have  also  the  case  of  Dionusos,  whom,  as 
having  been  born  of  a  woman,  we  must  apparently 
take  to  have  been  at  the  outset  a  mortal,  but  who  had, 
as  is  pretty  clear,  in  the  time  of  Homer  already  become 
an  Olympian  god. 

7.  Asclepios  underwent  a  subsequent  deification  ;  but 
in  Homer  he  is  a  mortal  only,  for  his  sons,  Podalirios 
and  Machaon,  bear  the  title  of  Asclepiad,1  and  no 
mortal  in  Homer  ever  derives  a  patronymic  from 
a  god. 

8.  To  whatever  inferences  the  case  of  Dionusos  may 
lead,  there  is  no  other  in  which  we  find  a  trace  or  sug- 
gestion of  worship  in  its  proper  sense,  as  paid  to  any 
deceased  or  translated  hero.  Yet  there  are  two  in- 
stances of  what  may  be  called  initial  worship,  which 
must  not  be  overlooked.  Achilles,  besides  the  fat  of 
oxen  and  sheep,  casts  four  ■  horses,  two  dogs,  and 
twelve  Trojan  youths,  upon  the  funeral  pyre  of 
Patroclos.2  This  is,  however,  I  think,  to  be  inter- 
preted purely  as  a  gratification  to  the  departed  spirit. 
In  the  Eleventh  Odyssey  we  advance  a  step  further, 
though  some  may  think  the  Oriental  character  of  the 
scenery  of  the  Poem  in  this  part  ought  to  be  taken  into 
account.  Odysseus,  by  express  order  from  Kirkd, 
besides  making  a  libation,  sacrifices  a  ram  and  a  sheep 
on  the  spot,  with  invocation  to  the  gods,  of  whom  A'ides 
and  Persephone  are  named  ;  and  permits  the  dead  suc- 
cessively to  drink  the  blood,  that  they  may  tell  him  what 
he  wants  to  know.3    Here  we  see,  dominant  and  un- 

i  II.  ii  731 ;  iv.  204.      2  n.  xxiii.  171-176.      3  Qd.  xi.  35,  44-47. 


THE  OLYMPIAN  SYSTEM. 


367 


mixed,  that  idea  of  actual  enjoyment  by  the  objects  of 
the  sacrifice,  which  in  the  case  of  ordinary  offerings  to 
the  gods  is  combined  with  other  ideas  more  proper  to 
the  notion  of  worship.  But  besides  this,  Odysseus  is 
also  enjoined  to  promise,  and  he  promises  accordingly, 
that,  on  his  return  to  Ithaca,  he  will  offer  (and  here  the 
sacrificial  words  §s&iv  and  Isqsvsiv  are  employed)  a  black 
sheep  to  Teiresias,  and  a  cow  that  has  never  calved  to 
the  dead  in  general.1  This  vow  seems  to  come  within 
a  step,  at  least,  of  the  full  idea  of  worship.  We  do  not 
hear  of  its  fulfilment  on  his  return  home  :  but  this  may 
be  because  we  are  not  carried  by  the  Poem  to  a  perfect 
settlement  of  the  difficulties  which  he  finds  awaiting 
him.  Prayers  (ev%ai  and  htat)  are  here  expressly  men- 
tioned as  used  in  the  propitiation  of  the  dead.  But  these 
are  the  entire  mass  of  dead,  not  selected  spirits  of  the 
great  or  brave. 

One  marked,  and  yet  rather  obscure,  form  of  the  con- 
nection between  the  gods  and  the  human  race  in  Homer 
is  that  of  divine  filiation.  It  is  with  much  diffidence 
that  I  offer  any  explanation  of  this  subject.  A  very 
large  number  of  cases  are  recorded  by  the  Poet,  in 
which  the  parentage  of  a  god  is  expressly  assigned  to 
some  human  house  or  hero.  In  some  instances  it 
arises  by  inference  ;  as  when  he  calls  Bellerophon,  the 
son  of  Sisuphos,  descended  from  the  god  (dnov  yovog2), 
which  can  only  mean,  as  Sisuphos  was  descended  from 
Aiolos,  that  Aiolos  was  the  offspring  of  a  god.  So, 
again,  in  the  Legend  of  Nestor,3  we  are  told  that  the 
young  heroes  of  the  line  of  Actor  were  saved  from 
death  by  their  ancestor  Poseidon.    The  Iliad  enables 


1  Od.  xi.  29-33. 


2  II.  vi.  191. 


3  II.  xi.  751. 


368 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


us  to  trace  this  line  up  to  Azeus,1  who  must  either 
have  been  a  reputed  son  of  the  god,  or  may  more  prob- 
ably have  been  an  Aiolid,  and  thus  descended  from  him, 
like  the  heads  of  so  many  other  great  houses.  Amphi- 
machos,  another  Actorid,  is  slain  in  the  Thirteenth 
Iliad :  whereupon  Poseidon  is  exceedingly  vexed  at 
heart  for  his  vlmvog  or  descendant.2 

To  examine  more  thoroughly  into  this  matter,  let  us 
take  first  for  consideration  the  case  of  the  great  Ancient 
Houses,  represented  by  their  chiefs  in  and  before  the 
Trojan  war  We  find  expressly  assigned  to  Zeus  the 
stocks  oi 

1.  Perseus,  4.  Heracles. 

2.  Minos,  5.  Minos, 

3.  Aiacos,  6.  Dardanos. 

And  to  Poseidon  those  of 

1.  Actor  (probably  through  Aiolos), 

2.  Pelias, 

3.  Neleus, 

4.  Bellerophon,  through  Aiolos, 

5.  Cretheus,  (and  Eumelos,)  through  Aiolos. 

Again  it  appears,  upon  examination,  that  Homer  very 
commonly  characterizes  by  the  epithet  d^vfAwv  persons 
of  recognized  divine  descent.  This  epithet  he  gives  to 
members  of  the  families  of 

.    1.  The  Pelopids, 

2.  Odysseus, 

3.  Telamon. 

4.  Portheus  (ancestor  of  Meleager  and  of  Tudeus), 

5.  Salmoneus  and  Augeias  (through  Aiolos,)  with  a  very 

few  others  of  less  distinction. 


i  II.  ii.  513,  621. 


2  II.  xiii.  206. 


THE  OLYMPIAN  SYSTEM.  369 

V 


But  the  question  arises,  why  is  Homer  so  reserved, 
in  many  of  these  cases,  with  respect  to  the  immediate 
connection  between  the  first  ancestor  and  the  divine 
stock  ?  The  case  where  we  should  have  expected  it  to 
be  most  clearly  declared,  is  that  of  the  great  sovereign 
house  of  Agamemnon.  But  not  a  word  is  said  by  him 
expressly  on  the  subject  of  the  birth  of  the  Pelopids ; 
and  the  sceptre  comes  first  into  the  hands  of  Pelops,1 
whereas  tradition  names  Tantalos  as  the  first  ancestor, 
and  this  Homer  in  no  way  contradicts.  In  the  case  of 
Dardanos,  on  the  contrary,  which  is  the  counterpart  to 
that  of  the  Pelopids,  the  line  is  traced  straight  up  to 
Zeus.2 

The  natural  explanation  seems  to  be  that,  here  as  in 
so  many  other  cases,  Homer's  functions  as  Chronicler 
were  circumscribed  by  his  feelings  of  nationality ;  and 
that  he  acted  on  his  usual  rule  of  never  knowingly  re- 
ferring, or  providing  means  to  refer,  anything  Hellenic 
to  a  source  admittedly  foreign.  Therefore,  where  the 
oldest  recognized  ancestor  is  an  undoubted  Greek,  as 
in  the  case  of  Aiacos  or  Heracles,  he  gives  the  divine 
parentage ;  but  where  the  line  ran  up  to  some  one, 
who  had  not  been  completely  or  adequately  Hellenized, 
there  no  distinct  declaration  is  given,  and  we  are  left  to 
form  a  judgment  for  ourselves,  from  slighter  indica- 
tions, or  from  the  fact  that  there  is  a  general  repre- 
sentation of  the  Kings  and  Chiefs  of  the  heroic  age  as 
heaven-descended.  In  the  case  of  Dardanos,  there 
could  be  no  corresponding  motive  for  reticence. 

It  will  be  observed,  that  all  the  very  ancient  houses 
in  Homer,  say  those  of  from  four  to  seven  generations 


i  II.  ii.  104. 


24 


2  II.  xx.  215. 


370 


JUYENTUS  MUNDI. 


back,  as  well  as  the  most  distinguished  modern  ones, 
like  those  of  Aiacos  and  Heracles,  are  referred  either 
to  Zeus,  the  supreme  god  of  the  Pelasgians  and  Hel- 
lenes ;  or  to  Poseidon,  who  appears  to  have  been  the 
supreme  god  according  to  the  conception  of  the  Phoe- 
nician immigrants.  So  far,  then,  as  these  cases  are 
concerned,  it  seems  needless  to  travel  far  in  search  of 
an  explanatory  hypothesis.  In  fact  if  there  was  a 
tradition,  such  as  we  find  from  the  Scriptures  to  have 
prevailed  among  the  Hebrews,  and  by  which  man  in 
his  first  inception  was  viewed  as  standing  in  the  rela- 
tion of  sonship  to  the  Almighty,  it  is  in  accordance  with 
all  likelihood  that,  in  process  of  time,  this  illustrious 
extraction  should  come  in  popular  estimation  to  be 
confined  to  chiefs  or  ruling  men. 

This  explanation  is  however  principally  available  for 
the  class  of  Kings  and  Princes,  who  are  called  Zeus- 
born  and  Zeus-nurtured ;  and  for  those  individual 
cases,  which  are  of  the  greatest  antiquity,  and  where 
no  name  of  a  mother  is  preserved.  When  we  find  a 
maternal  name,  a  new  element  of  difficulty  is  intro- 
duced. This  difficulty  may  be  deemed  secondary  in 
cases  like  those  of  Minos  and  Perseus  ;  because  there 
the  mother  may  be  nothing  more  than  an  indication, 
supplied  by  tradition,  of  the  national  extraction  of  the 
son.  The  mother  of  Minos  is  simply  '  the  daughter  of 
an  illustrious  Phoenician,'  and  Danae  has  her  counter- 
part in  a  local  Phoenician  name.  But  what  are  we  to 
say  of  Alcmen£,  the  mother  of  Heracles  ? 1  of  Lao- 
damia,  the  mother  of  Sarpedon  ? 2  of  Astuoche,  the 
mother  of  Ascalaphos  and  Ialmenos  ? 3  of  Polumele,4 


i  II.  xix.  98. 
3  II.  ii.  513. 


'2  II.  vi.  198. 
4  II.  xvi.  180. 


THE  OLYMPIAN  SYSTEM. 


371 


the  mother  of  Eudoros  ?  perhaps  also,  of  Turo,  the 
mother  of  Pelias  and  Neleus  ? 1  All  these  are  women, 
having  a  place  and  an  individuality  as  well  defined  as 
any  other  pre-Homeric  women  of  the  Poems. 

The  explanation  commonly  given  of  these  cases  has 
been  that  they  were  cases  of  mere  bastardy,  covered 
with  the  illustrious  names  of  deity.  May  it  not  how- 
ever be  said  that,  if  this  be  true,  then  nowhere  did 
those  connected  with  the  birth  of  illegitimate  children 
take  so  amazingly  high  a  flight  as  among  the  Greeks ; 
since,  not  content  with  equality,  they  gave  them  a 
higher  title,  by  extraction,  than  the  lawful  offspring  of 
the  family  themselves  enjoyed  ?  Of  bastardy,  as  com- 
monly understood,  we  have  plenty  of  examples  in  the 
Homeric  poems.  Sometimes,  as  in  the  case  of  Eudoros, 
a  person  born  out  of  wedlock  was  reared  upon  the  same 
footing  as  a  legitimate  child.  But  when  this  is  done, 
it  is  always  mentioned  as  a  thing  worthy  of  note,  evi- 
dently because  more  or  less  exceptional. 

I  cannot  help  thinking  that  these  singular  cases  of 
persons  who  had  a  known  mother,  and  who  supplied 
the  want  of  a  known  father  by  claiming  the  parentage 
of  .  a  god,  were  not  cases  of  common  bastardy,  but  that 
they  are  rather  to  be  explained  by  reference  to  the  an- 
cient customs  of  what  may  be  called  marriage  by  vio- 
lent abduction,  or  violation  without  dishonor,  practised 
in  ancient  times  by  the  men  of  one  tribe  upon  the 
daughters  of  another.2  Of  the  traces  of  this  custom, 
ancient  history  is  full ;  and  even  modern  manners,  in 
certain  cases,  aye  at  our  very  doors,  visibly  retain 

1  Od.  xi.  235,  254. 

2  See  Maclellan  on  Primitive  Marriage,  Edinb.  1865. 


372 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


them.  It  seems  to  me  that  where,  in  the  incidents  of 
a  tribal  raid,  some  noble  maid  or  even  some  matron  of 
high  birth  fell  a  victim  to  the  lust  of  an  invader,  it 
was  agreeable  to  likelihood,  as  well  as  to  social  justice, 
that  a  clear  line  should  be  drawn  between  such  cases 
and  cases  of  dishonor  willingly  or  corruptly  incurred ; 
and  that  either  the  involuntary  mother  at  the  time  of 
the  birth,  or  her  offspring  as  he  grew  up,  and  went 
among  his  fellows  without  having  like  them  a  father  to 
point  to  and  to  lean  on,  might  exceptionally,  and  under 
favoring  circumstances,  have  contrived  to  imitate  for 
themselves  the  old  tradition  of  the  descent  of  kings 
from  gods.  The  choice  of  the  deity  might  in  such 
cases  be  influenced  by  the  particular  worship  in  vogue 
among  the  aggressive  tribe. 

The  correlative  cases,  of  legendary  births  due  to  the 
passion  of  goddesses  for  men,  may  perhaps  admit  of  a 
similar  explanation.  The  probable  difference  in  the 
facts  being,  that  these  would  be  instances  where  the 
mother  disappeared,  and  the  child  remained  in  the 
possession  of  the  father.  This  remark  may  possibly 
apply  to  iEneas,  son  of  Aphrodite  ;  to  Aisepos  and 
Pedasos,  sons  of  the  Naiad  Nymph  Abarbare£ ;  to 
Satnios,  the  son  of  another  Naiad ;  and  to  Iphition, 
the  son  of  a  third.1 

The  birth  of  Achilles  from  Thetis  will  not  fall  into 
either  of  these  categories;  since  it  is  represented  as 
having  taken  place  in  regular  wedlock.  My  conjecture 
respecting  this  birth  is,  that  it  may  possibly  be  a  pure 
invention,  due  to  Homer  himself,  though  perhaps  sug- 
gested by  the  legends  current  in  his  day,  respecting  the 


1  II.  ii.  821 ;  vi.  21 ;  xiv.  444;  xx.  384. 


THE  OLYMPIAN  SYSTEM. 


373 


attachments  contracted  by  goddesses  to  mortal  men. 
Such  a  fiction  would  be  comparatively  easy  in  the  case 
of  one  who,  like  Peleus,  was  a  reputed  immigrant  into 
the  country  which  he  ruled. 

I  sum  up  then  by  observing  that  we  find,  over  and 
above  the  use  of  language  properly  figurative,  four 
main  channels  of  approach  for  the  human  nature  to 
the  divine, 

1.  Translation. 

2.  Mixed  Composition. 

3.  Affiliation. 

4.  Deification. 

And  affiliation  again,  if  I  am  right,  appears  in  at  least 
four  shapes, 

(a)  The  ascription   of  a   Divine   birth  or  nurture  to 

Kings  and  Princes  as  a  class. 

(b)  The  ascription  of  a  particular  god  as  ancestor  to 

a  sovereign  house.  This  god  is  always  either  Zeus 
or  Poseidon. 

(c)  More  recent  births  from  a  divine  father. 

(d)  Births  of  men  from  a  goddess ;  few,  and  all  recent. 

VII.     The  Homeric  View  of  the  Future  State. 

The  picture  of  the  future  state  of  man  in  Homer  is 
eminently  truthful  as  a  representation  of  a  creed  which 
had  probably  fallen  into  dilapidation,  and  of  the  feel- 
ings which  clustered  about  it ;  and  it  is  perhaps  unri- 
valled in  the  perfectly  natural,  but  penetrating  force, 
with  which  it  conveys  the  effect  of  dreariness  and 
gloom.  It  does  not  appear  to  be  in  all  respects 
coherent  and  symmetrical ;  and,  while  nothing  be- 
tokens that  this  defect  is  owing  to  the  diversity  of 


374 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


the  sources  from  which  the  traditions  are  drawn,  it 
is  such  as  might  be  due  to  the  waste  wrought  by  time 
and  change  on  a  belief  which  had  at  an  earlier  date 
been  self-consistent. 

The  future  life,  however,  is  in  Homer  used  with 
solemnity  and  force  as  a  sanction  of  the  moral  laws, 
especially  in  so  far  as  the  crime  of  perjury  is  concerned.1 
The  Erinues  dwell  in  the  Underworld,  and  punish  per- 
jurors. As  the  Erinues  are  invoked  with  reference  to 
other  offences,2  we  may  therefore  presume  them  also  to 
have  been  punishable  in  the  Underworld. 

The  world  to  come  is  exhibited  to  us  by  Homer  in 
three  divisions. 

First,  there  is  the  Elysian  plain,  apparently  under 
the  government  of  Rhadamanthus,  to  which  Menelaos 
will  be  conducted,  or  rather  perhaps  translated,  in 
order  to  die  there ;  not  for  his  virtues,  however,  but 
because  he  is  the  husband  of  Helen,  and  so  the  son-in- 
law  of  Zeus.  The  main  characteristic  of  this  abode 
seems  to  be  easy  and  abundant  subsistence  with  an 
atmosphere  free  from  the  violence  of  winter,  and  from 
rain  and  snow.  Okeanos  freshens  it* with  Zephyrs  ;  it 
is  therefore  apparently  on  the  western  border  of  the 
world.3  Mr.  Max  Miiller  conjectures  that  Elysium 
(JftvOw)  may  be  a  name  simply  expressing  the  future.4 
The  whole  conception,  however,  may  be  deemed  more 
or  less  ambiguous,  inasmuch  as  the  Elysian  state  is 
antecedent  to  death. 

2.  Next  comes  the  Underworld  proper,  the  general 
receptacle  of  human  spirits.    It  nowhere  receives  a 

1  II.  iii.  297 ;  xix.  259.  2  See  Erinues,  sect.  iii.  supra. 

3  Od.  iv.  561-569.  4  Lectures  on  Language,  ii.  562,  n. 


THE  OLYMPIAN  SYSTEM. 


375 


territorial  name  in  Homer,  but  is  called  the  abode  of 
Aides,  or  of  Aides  and  Persephone\  Its  character  is 
chill,  drear,  and  dark  ;  the  very  gods  abhor  it.1  Better 
to  serve  for  hire  even  a  needy  master,  says  the  Shade  of 
Achilles,  than  to  be  lord  over  all  the  dead.2  It  reaches, 
however,  under  the  crust  of  the  earth;  for,  in  the  Theo- 
machy,  Aidoneus  dreads  lest  the  earthquake  of  Poseidon 
should  lay  open  his  domain  to  gods  and  men.3 

Minos  administers  justice  among  the  dead,  as  a  king 
would  on  earth.  But  they  are  in  general  under  no 
penal  infliction.  Three  cases  only  are  mentioned  as 
cases  of  suffering :  those  of  Tituos,  Tantalos,  and 
Sisuphos.4  The  offence  is  only  named  in  the  case  of 
Tituos ;  it  was  violence  offered  to  the  goddess  Leto. 
Heracles  suffers  a  strange  discerption  of  individuality  ; 
for  his  eidolon  or  Shade  moves  and  speaks  here, 
while '  he  himself  is  at  the  banquets  of  the  immortals.' 5 
Again,  Castor  and  Pollux  are  here,  and  are  alive  on 
alternate  days,  while  they  enjoy  on  earth  the  honors  of 
deities.6  Here,  then,  somewhat  conflicting  conditions 
appear  to  be  combined. 

Within  the  dreary  region  seems  to  be  a  palace, 
which  is  in  a  more  special  sense  the  residence  of  its 
rulers.7 

The  access  to  the  Underworld  is  in  the  far  Bast,  by 
the  Ocean  River,  at  a  full  day's  sail  from  the  Euxine, 
in  the  country  of  the  cloud-wrapt  Kimmerioi.8  From 
this  point  the  way  lies,  for  an  indefinite  distance,  up 
the  Stream ;  to  a  point  where  the  beach  is  narrow,  and 

1  II.  xx.  65.  2  od.  xi.  489. 

3  II.  xx.  61.  Comp.  Od.  xi.  302.  4  Od.  xi.  576,  582,  593. 

•5  Od.  xi.  601-627.  6  Od.  xi.  300-304. 

7  Od.  xi.  627,  635.         8  Od.  xi.  9-14.    See  Chap.  XIII.  sect.  3. 


376 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


where  Persephone  is  worshipped  in  her  groves  of  poplar 
and  of  willow.1 

3.  There  is  also  the  region  of  Tartaros,  as  far  below 
that  of  Aides,  as  Aides  is  below  the  earth.  Here 
dwell  Iapetos  and  Kronos,  far  from  the  solar  ray.2 
Kronos  has  a  band  of  gods  around  him,  who  have  in 
another  place  the  epithet  of  sub-Tartarean  ;  and  the 
name  of  Titans.3  It  does  not  appear  whether  these 
are  at  all  identified  with  the  deposed  dynasty  of  the 
Nature  Powers,  whose  dwelling  is  in  the  Underworld  ;4 
and  with  whom  the  human  Dead  had  communication, 
for  Achilles  charges  the  Shade  of  Patroclos  with  a 
commission  to  the  River  Spercheios.5 

The  line,  therefore,  between  the  realm  of  Aides  and 
the  dark  Tartaros  is  obscurely  drawn  ;  but  in  general 
we  may  say  that,  while  the  former  was  for  men,  the 
latter  was  for  deposed  or  condemned  Immortals.  We 
hear  of  the  offences  of  Eurumedon  and  the  Giants  with 
their  ruler ;  6  and,  though  their  place  is  not  named,  we 
may  presume  them,  as  well  as  Otos  and  Ephialtes,  to 
be  in  Tartaros,  in  addition  to  the  deities  already 
named.7  Hither  it  is  that  Zeus  threatens  to  hurl 
down  refractory  divinities  of  the  Olympian  Court.8 

This  threefold  division  of  the  unseen  world  is  in 
some  kind  of  correspondence  with  the  Christian,  and 
with  what  may  have  been  the  patriarchal,  tradition  ;  as 
is  the  retributive  character  of  the  future  state,  how- 
ever imperfectly  developed,  and  the  continuance  there 
of  the  habits  and  propensities  acquired  on  earth. 

i  Od.  x.  506-512.         2  ii.  Viii.  16,  479.  3  II.  xiv.  274,  279. 

4  II.  iii.  278.  5  ii.  xxiii.  144-153.  6  Od.  vii.  58-60. 

1  Od.  xi.  318.    II.  v.  385,  407. 
8  II.  v.  897,  898 ;  viii.  10-17  ;  401-406. 


THE  OLYMPIAN  SYSTEM. 


377 


VII I.    The  Olympian  System  in  its  Results. 

The  history  of  the  race  of  Adam  before  the  Advent 
is  the  history  of  a  long  and  varied  but  incessant  prep- 
aration for  the  Advent.  It  is  commonly  perceived 
that  Greece  contributed  a  language  and  an  intellectual 
discipline,  Rome  a  political  organization,  to  the  appar- 
atus which  was  put  in  readiness  to  assist  the  propaga- 
tion of  the  Gospel ;  and  that  each  of  these,  in  its  kind, 
was  the  most  perfect  that  the  world  had  produced. 
I  have  endeavored  elsewhere  to  show  with  some  ful- 
ness what  was  the  place  of  Greece  in  the  Providential 
order  of  the  world  ; 1  and  likewise  what  was  the  rela- 
tion of  Homer  to  the  Greeks,  and  to  their  part  of  the 
Divine  plan,  as  compared  with  the  relation  of  the 
Sacred  Scriptures  to  the  chosen  people  of  God.2 
I  cannot  now  enter  on  that  field  at  large  ;  yet  neither 
can  I  part  without  a  word  from  the  subject  of  the 
Olympian  religion. 

In  the  works  of  Homer,  this  design  is  projected  with 
such  extraordinary  grandeur,  that  the  representation 
of  it,  altogether  apart  from  the  general  merits  of  the 
Poems,  deserves  to  be  considered  as  one  of  the  topmost 
achievements  of  the  human  mind.  Yet  its  character, 
as  it  was  first  and  best  set  forth  in  its  entirety  from 
the  brain  of  the  finisher  and  the  maker,  is  not  more 
wonderful  than  its  subsequent  influence  and  duration 
in  actual  life.  For,  during  twelve  or  fourteen  hundred 
years,  it  was  -the  religion  of  the  most  thoughtful,  the 
most  fruitful,  the  most  energetic  portions  of  the  human 

1  Address  to  the  University  of  Edinburgh,  1865. 

2  Studies  on  Homer,  vol.  ii.    Olympos,  sect.  x. 


878 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


family.  It  yielded  to  Christianity  alone  ;  and  to  the 
Church  it  yielded  with  reluctance,  summoning  up 
strength  in  its  extreme  old  age,  and  only  giving  way 
after  an  intellectual  as  well  as  a  civil  battle,  obstinately 
fought,  and  lasting  for  generations.  For  the  greater 
part  of  a  century  after  the  fall  of  Constantinople,  in 
the  chief  centres  of  a  Christian  civilization  in  many 
respects  degenerated,  and  an  ecclesiastical  power  too 
little  faithful  to  its  trust,  Greek  letters  and  Greek 
thought  once  again  asserted  their  strength  over  the 
most  cultivated  minds  of  Italy,  in  a  manner  which 
testified  to  the  force,  and  to  the  magic  charm,  with 
which  they  were  imperishably  endowed.  Even  within 
what  may  be  called  our  own  time,  the  Olympian  religion 
has  exercised  a  fascination  altogether  extraordinary 
over  the  mind  of  Goethe,  who  must  be  regarded  as 
standing  in  the  very  first  rank  of  the  great  minds  of 
the  latest  centuries. 

The  Olympian  religion,  however,  owes  perhaps  as 
large  a  share  of  its  triumphs  to  its  depraved  accom- 
modations, as  to  its  excellencies.  Yet  an  instrument 
so  durable,  potent,  and  elastic,  must  certainly  have 
had  a  purpose  to  serve.  Let  us  consider  for  a  moment 
what  it  may  have  been. 

We  have  seen  how  closely,  and  in  how  many  ways, 
it  bound  humanity  and  deity  together.  As  regarded 
matter  of  duty  and  virtue,  not  to  speak  of  that  highest 
form  of  virtue  which  is  called  holiness,  this  union  was 
effected  mainly  by  lowering  the  divine  element.  But 
as  regarded  all  other  functions  of  our  nature,  outside 
the  domain  of  the  life  to  god-ward,  all  those  functions 
which  are  summed  up  in  what  Saint  Paul  calls  the 
flesh  and  the  mind,  the  psychic  and  the  bodily  life, 


THE  OLYMPIAN  SYSTEM.  379 

the  tendency  of  the  system  was  to  exalt  the  human 
element,  by  proposing  a  model  of  beauty,  strength, 
and  wisdom,  in  all  their  combinations,  so  elevated,  that 
the  effort  to  attain  them  required  a  continual  upward 
strain.  It  made  divinity  attainable  ;  and  thus  it  effect- 
ually directed  the  thought  and  aim  of  man 

'  Along  the  line  of  limitless  desires/ 

Such  a  scheme  of  religion,  though  failing  grossly  in 
the  government  of  the  passions,  and  in  upholding  the 
standard  of  moral  duties,  tended  powerfully  to  pro- 
duce a  lofty  self-respect,  and  a  large,  free,  and  varied 
conception  of  humanity.  It  incorporated  itself  in 
schemes  of  notable  discipline  for  mind  and  body,  in- 
deed of  a  lifelong  education  ;  and  these  habits  of  mind 
and  action  had  their  marked  results  (to  omit  many 
other  greatnesses)  in  a  philosophy,  literature,  and  art, 
which  remain  to  this  day  unrivalled  or  unsurpassed. 

The  sacred  fire,  indeed,  that  was  to  touch  the  mind 
and  heart  of  man  from  above,  was  in  preparation 
elsewhere.  Within  the  shelter  of  the  hills  that  stand 
about  Jerusalem,  the  great  Archetype  of  the  spiritual 
excellence  and  purification  of  man  was  to  be  produced 
and  matured.  But  a  body,  as  it  were,  was  to  be  made 
ready  for  this  angelic  soul.  And  as  when  some  splen- 
did edifice  is  to  be  reared,  its  diversified  materials  are 
brought  from  this  quarter  and  from  that,  according  as  na- 
ture and  man  favor  their  production,  so  did  the  wisdom 
of  God,  with  slow  but  ever  sure  device,  cause  to  ripen 
amidst  the  several  races*  best  adapted  for  the  work,  the 
several  component  parts  of  the  noble  fabric  of  a  Chris- 
tian manhood  and  a  Christian  civilization.  4  The  kings 
of  Tharsis  and  of  the  isles  shall  give  presents :  the 


380 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


kings  of  Arabia  and  Saba  shall  bring  gifts.' 1  Every 
worker  was,  with  or  without  his  knowledge  and  his 
will,  to  contribute  to  the  work.  And  among  them  an 
appropriate  part  was  thus  assigned  both  to  the  Greek 
people,  and  to  what  I  have  termed  the  Olympian  re- 
ligion. 


i  Ps.  lxxii.  10. 


CHAPTER  X. 

Ethics  of  the  Heroic  Age. 
Section  I. 

In  general  outline,  we  may  thus  sum  up  the  moral 
character  of  the  Homeric  Greeks,  favorably  regarded. 

A  high-spirited,  energetic,  adventurous,  and  daring 
people,  they  show  themselves  prone  to  acts  of  hasty 
violence  ;  and  their  splendid  courage  occasionally  even 
degenerates,  under  the  influence  of  strong  passion, 
into  ferocity,  while  their  acuteness  and  sagacity  some- 
times, though  more  rarely,  take  a  decided  tinge  of 
cunning.  Yet  they  are  neither  selfish,  cruel,  nor  im- 
placable. At  the  same  time,  self-command  is  scarcely 
less  conspicuous  among  them  than  strong,  and  deep, 
and  quick  emotion.  They  are,  in  the  main,  a  people 
of  warm  affections  and  high  honor,  commonly  tender, 
never  morbid  :  they  respect  the  weak  and  the  helpless  ; 
they  hold  authority  in  reverence.  Domestic  purity, 
too,  is  cherished  and  esteemed  among  them  more  than 
elsewhere  ;  and  they  have  not  yet  fallen  into  the  lower 
depths  of  sensual  excess. 

The  Greek  thanks  the  gods  in  his  prosperity  ;  wit- 
ness the  case  of  Laertes.    It  is  perhaps  less  remark- 


382 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


able  that  in  his  adversity  he  appeals  to  them  for  aid. 
If,  again,  he  is  discontented,  he  complains  of  them; 
for  he  harbors  no  concealed  dissatisfaction.  Ready 
enough  to  take  from  those  who  have,  he  is  at  least  as 
ready  to  give  to  those  who  need.  He  represents  to  the 
life  the  sentiment  which  another  great  master  of  man- 
ners has  given  to  his  Duke  of  Argyle,  in  the  '  Heart  of 
Mid  Lothian  : '  4  It  is  our  Highland  privilege  to  take 
from  all  what  we  want,  and  to  give  to  all  what  they 
want.' 1  Distinctions  of  class  are  recognized,  but  they 
are  mild  and  genial ;  there  is  no  arrogance  on  the  one 
side,  nor  any  servility  on  the  other.  Reverence  is  paid 
to  those  in  authority  ;  and  yet  the  Greek  thinks  in  the 
spirit,  and  moves  in  the  sphere,  of  habitual  freedom. 
Over  and  above  his  warmth  and  tenacity  in  domestic 
affections,  he  prizes  highly  those  other  special  relations 
between  man  and  man,  which  mitigate  and  restrain 
the  law  of  force  in  societies  as  yet  imperfectly  organ- 
ized. He  thoroughly  admires  the  intelligence  dis- 
played in  stratagem,  whether  among  the  resources 
of  self-defence,  or  by  way  of  jest  upon  a  friend,  or 
for  the  hurt  or  ruin  of  an  enemy ;  but  life  in  disguise 
he  cannot  away  with,  and  holds  it  a  prime  article  in 
his  creed  that  the  tongue  should  habitually  represent 
the  man.2 

From  these  facts,  if  taken  alone,  we  might  be  tempted 
to  suppose,  that  the  Greeks  of  the  Homeric  age  were 
an  inhuman  and  savage  race,  who  did  not  appreciate 
the  value  of  human  life.  But  this  is  not  so.  They 
are  not  a  cruel  people.  There  is  no  wanton  infliction 
of  pain  throughout  the  whole  operations  of  the  Iliad ; 


]  Scott's  Novels  and  Tales,  8vo.  ed.,  x.  238. 


2  II.  ix.  312. 


ETHICS  OF  THE  HEROIC  AGE.  383 


no  delight  in  the  sufferings  of  others,  no  aggravation 
of  them  through  vindictive  passion.  The  only  need- 
less wounds  given,  are  wounds  inflicted  on  the  dead 
body  of  Hector.1  It  seems  to  be  not  a  disregard  of 
human  life,  but  an  excess  of  regard  for  courage,  which 
led  them  to  undervalue  the  miseries  incident  to  vio- 
lence. 

The  character  of  Heracles,  or  Hercules,  is  one  of 
which  we  hear  much  more  evil  than  good  in  the 
Poems,  if  indeed  we  hear  any  good  at  all.  The  cli- 
max of  his  misdeeds  is  in  the  case  of  Iphitos,  the 
possessor  of  certain  fine  mares.  Heracles  became  his 
guest,  slew  him,  and  carried  off  the  animals.2  Yet,  he 
is  nowhere  held  up  to  reprobation.  Indeed  he  seems 
to  be  a  sharer  of  the  banquets  of  the  gods,  and  has 
Heb£  for  his  wife;  his  Shade,  or  Eidolon,  however, 
dwelling  in  the  Underworld.3  If  this  passage  be  genu- 
ine, we  can  only  suppose  his  crimes  to  be  redeemed, 
in  the  public  judgment,  by  his  courage,  together  with 
his  divine  extraction.  And  the  passage  is  supported 
by  the  application  to  him  of  the  epithet  theios,  which 
is  given  in  the  Poems  only  to  the  two  Protagonists, 
Achilles  and  Odysseus,  among  the  living,  and  to  the 
most  distinguished  among  the  dead.  Certainly,  the 
indignation  of  the  Greeks  is  against  Paris  the  effemi- 
nate coward,  much  more  than  Paris  the  ravisher.  The 
shame  of  the  abduction  lay  in  the  fact  that  he  was  the 
guest  of  Menelaos.4  And  the  guilt  of  Aigisthos  finds 
its  climax  in  this,  that  he  slew  Agamemnon  by  stealth, 
at  a  banquet,  like  a  stalled  ox.5    Piracy,  again,  was 


i  II.  xxii.  371.  2  Od.  xxi.  24-30. 

3  Od.  xi.  601-604.  *  n  m  351-354. 

5  Od.  i.  35-37 ;  iv.  524-535 ;  xi.  409-420. 


384 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


regarded,  at  the  very  least,  with  a  moral  indifference,1 
which  continued  down  to  the  time  of  Thucydides  in 
many  parts  of  Greece.2  Even  Odysseus,  the  model- 
prince,  when  he  has  destroyed  the  Suitors,  and  is  con- 
sidering how  he  can  repair  his  wasted  substance, 
calculates  upon  effecting  it  in  part  by  occasional 
free-booting.3  To  the  principle,  then,  he  freely  gives 
his  sanction ;  although  he  probably  attacked  the  Ki- 
cones  as  allies  of  Troy ; 4  and  he  disapproved,  as  it 
appears,  of  the  raid  upon  the  Egyptians,  which  in  one 
of  his  fables  he  imputes  to  his  ship's  company.5  This 
act  is  denominated  an  outrage  ; 6  and  some  disapproval 
of  pirates  is  implied  in  another  passage.7  But  it  is 
faint.  Piracy  was  a  practice  connected  on  one  side 
with  trade,  and  on  the  other  with  fighting ;  and  it 
seems  to  have  been  acquitted  of  guilt  for  the  reason 
that  the  gains  of  the  pirate's  life  were  the  fruit  of 
bravery  combined  with  skill,  and  were  not  unequally 
balanced  by  its  dangers.  And  piracy  seems  to  have 
been  practised  only  upon  foreigners  ;  of  course  such 
foreigners  only  as  did  not  come  within  the  range  .  of 
any  bond  of  guestship. 

Religion,  however,  had  a  considerable  moral  force. 

The  connection  in  the  age  of  Homer  between  duty 
on  the  one  side,  and  religious  belief  and  reverence  on 
the  other,  is  well  seen 

(a)  Negatively,  by  the  faithlessness  and  ferocity  of 
the  Cyclops  towards  men,  while  he  avows  his  contempt 
for  Zeus  and  the  gods.8 

(b)  By  the  fact  that  the  persons  addicted  to  sacrifice 

i  Od.  iii.  72.  2  Thuc.  i.  5.  3  Od.  xxiii.  357. 

4  Od.  ix.  40.  5  Od.  xiv.  259  seqq.      6  Od.  xiv.  262. 

1  Od.  xxiv.  111.  8  Od.  ix.  273-280,  356,  368-370. 


ETHICS  OF  THE  HEROIC  AGE. 


385 


and  religious  observances  are  with  Homer  the  upright 
and.  good  men :  such  as  Hector  in  the  Iliad,  and  Eu- 
maios  in  the  Odyssey.1 

(<?)  As  our  word  '  righteous,'  founded  on  right, 
and  embracing  morality,  extends  also  to  piety,  so 
in  Homer  the  corresponding  word  dicaios  clearly 
embraces  duty  towards  the  gods.2  The  Abioi,3  an 
uncivilized  nation,  are  with  him  '  the  most  righteous 
of  men.' 

(d~)  Conversely,  the  character  of  the  theoudes,  or 
god-revering  man,  is  identified  with  that  of  the 
stranger-loving,  and  opposed  to  that  of  the  insolent, 
the  savage,  and  the  unrighteous.4 

(e)  The  wicked  man  cannot  by  sacrifices  secure  the 
fruits  of  his  crime.  Aigisthos  offers  them  in  abun- 
dance :  but  the  gods  destroy  him  by  the  hand  of 
Orestes.5 

(/)  Though  the  outward  act  of  sacrifice  did  not  of 
necessity  imply  a  corresponding  frame  of  mind,  yet  it 
was  of  religious  tendency.  The  ordinary  offering,  at  the 
common  meal,  of  a  portion  to  the  deity  as  the  giver, 
may  be  compared  with  the  4  grace '  among  Christians. 
In  solemn  celebrations,  and  sometimes  indeed  at  the 
private  meal,6  prayer  and  thanksgiving  were  commonly 
combined  with  the  rite. 

(cj)  The  gods,  as  we  have  already  seen,  were  thought, 
in  a  real  though  incomplete  measure,  to  be  rewarders 
of  the  good,  and  punishers  of  the  bad. 

(Ji)  There  was  a  strong  general  belief  in  the  efficacy 
of  prayer,  testified  by  its  practice. 

1  E.  xxiv.  68.    Od.  xiv.  420.  2  Qd.  in.  132-136. 

3  II.  xiii.  6.  4  od.  vi.  120. 

5  Od.  iii.  272-275  ;  i.  35-43.  6  Od.  xiv.  423. 

25 


386 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


We  must  not  deny  the  reality  of  moral  distinctions 
in  Homer  upon  any  such  ground  as  that  he  sometimes 
describes  greatness  and  strength  by  names  rather  de- 
noting virtue,  and  mentions,  for  example,  the  services 
4  which  the  inferior  render  to  the  good.'1  The  language 
even  of  our  own  day  has  not  yet  escaped  from  this 
very  improper  confusion.  We  still  speak  of  the  '  better 
classes,'  and  of '  good  society.'  By  him,  as  by  us,  the 
error  is  escaped  in  other  cases  :  for  he  calls  the  Suitor- 
Princes  'very  inferior  men.'2  And  the  word  agathos, 
or  good,  has  unquestionably  in  some  passages  a  solely 
moral  meaning : 3  while  it  is  never  applied  to  any  bad 
man  or  action,  however  energetic  or  successful. 

There  was  a  voice  of  conscience,  and  a  sentiment 
ranging  between  reverence  and  fear,  within  the  breast. 
Sometimes  this  ascended  to  a  point  far  higher  than 
the  mere  avoidance  of  crime.  After  his  conquest  of 
the  Hupoplakian  Thebes,  Achilles  would  not  despoil  the 
body  of  the  slain  king  Eetion,  and  burned  it  with 
the  precious  armor  on.  He  was  restrained,  not  by 
general  opinion,  but  by  the  inward  sentiment  called 
sebas.4  To  strip  the  corpse  would  have  been  the 
usual  course.  Telemachos  endeavors,  of  course  in 
vain,  to  arouse  in  the  minds  of  the  Suitors  a  nemesis5 
of  self-judgment,  or  sense  of  the  moral  law.  To  this 
nemesis  (often  inaccurately  rendered  as  revenge) 
Menelaos  appeals,  when  exciting  the  Greeks  to  defend 
the  body  of  Patroclos6  from  insult.  But  the  whole 
matter  is  best  learned  from  an  address  of  Telemachos 
to  the  Suitors,  where  he  says  (a)  '  rouse  within  you  of 
yourselves  a  nemesis  (or  moral  sense)  ;  and  (5)  an 


i  Od.  xv.  324.  2  Od.  xxi.  325.  3  II.  vi.  162  ;  ix.  341. 

4  II.  vi.  417.  5  Od.  i  138.  6  II.  xvii.  254. 


ETHICS  OF  THE  HEROIC  AGE. 


387 


aldcog  (  a  sense  of  honor,  or  regard  to  opinion  of  your 
fellow-citizens).;  and  (c)  fear  the  wrath  of  the  gods.'1 
These  three  principles  were  the  three  great  pillars  of 
morality.  The  motive  of  aldcog  may  be  stirred  by  the 
dijfAov  cpdng,  or  public  sentiment,  which  we  find  to  have 
been  an  engine  of  great  power  with  Phoenix,2  and  even 
with  Penelope  and  Nausicaa.  This  aidos  is  a  senti- 
ment which  has  ultimate  reference  to  the  standard  of 
opinion  ;  but  it  does  not  require  that  opinion  to  be  in 
present  and  immediate  action.  It  it  self-judgment,  ac- 
cording to  the  standard  supplied  by  the  ideas  of  others; 
as  nemesis  is  self-judgment  by  the  inward  law.  This 
aldcog  ranges  through  a  great  variety  of  sub-meanings, — 
deference,  tenderness,  scrupulosity,  compassion,  self- 
respect,  piety,  bashfulness,  honor,  and  every  form  of 
shame,  excepting  false  shame.  Hesiod  says  in  his  iron, 
or  post-Homeric  age,  that  aldcog,  along  with  vfyacng,  had 
vanished  from  the  earth. 

With  respect  to  blood-shedding,  the  morality  of  the 
Greeks  of  Homer  was  extremely  loose.  To  have  killed 
a  man  was  considered  a  misfortune,  or  at  most  an  error 
in  point  of  prudence.3  It  was  punished  by  a  fine  pay- 
able to  relatives,  which  it  was  usual  to  accept  in  full 
satisfaction.  But  fugitives  from  their  vengeance  were 
everywhere  received  without  displeasure  or  surprise. 
Priam,  appearing  unexpectedly  before  Achilles,  is  com- 
pared to  a  man  who,  having  had  the  misfortune  to  slay 
somebody,  appears  on  a  sudden  in  a  strange  place.4 

The  cases  of  such  homicides  are  numerous  in  the 
Poems.    It  may  be  enough  to  observe  that  Patroclos, 


i  Od.  ii.  64-67. 
3  II.  ix.  632. 


2  II.  ix.  460. 

4  II.  xxiv.  480-482. 


388 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


whose  character  is  one  of  great  gentleness,  committed 
one  in  his  youth  without  premeditation,1  and  was 
therefore  given  over  by  his  father  Menoitios  into  the 
honorable  charge  of  Peleus  :  that  Ajax  had  received 
Lycophron  after  homicide,  and  6  honored  him  as  if 
a  beloved  parent:'2  and  that  Telemachos  receives 
Theoclumenos,  and  gives  him  the  place  of  honor, 
when  he  had  simply  announced  himself  as  a  fugitive 
from  the  vengeance  of  the  powerful  kindred  of  a  man 
whom  he  had  killed,3  without  stating  anything  about 
the  cause. 

It  is  difficult,  however,  to  trace  in  Homer  the  exist- 
ence of  an  universal  law  of  relative  duty,  between 
man  and  man  as  such.  The  chief  restraints  upon  mis- 
deeds were  to  be  found  in  laws,  understood  but  not 
written,  and  which  were  binding  as  between  certain 
men,  not  between  all  men.    These  were 

1.  Members  of  a  family. 

2.  Members  of  a  State  or  nation. 

3.  Persons  bound  by  the  law  of  guestship. 

4.  Suppliants  and  those  whom  they  addressed. 
The  weakest  point  of  the  Homeric  system  of  ethics 

is  its  tenderness  (to  say  the  least)  for  fraud  under  cer- 
tain conditions.  This  has  ever  been  indeed  a  difficult 
chapter  in  the  science  of  Ethics :  it  is  probably  one, 
in  which  the  human  faculties  will  ever,  or  very  long, 
remain  unequal  to  the  task  of  drawing  at  once  clearly 
and  firmly,  in  abstract  statement,  the  lines  of  discrimi- 
nation between  right  and  wrong.  In  Homer,  how- 
ever, we  seem  to  find  the  balance  not  doubtfully  deter- 
mined, but  manifestly  inclining  the  wrong  way.  Into 

i  II.  xxiii.  86.  2  ii.  xv.  429-440.  3  Od.  xv.  260  seqq. 


ETHICS  OF  THE  HEROIC  AGE. 


389 


the  mouth  of  Achilles,  indeed,  he  has  put  the  most 
powerful  denunciation  of  falsehood  ever  uttered  by 
man.1    Pope's  rendering  is  not  quite  unworthy  — 

'  Who  dares  think  one  thing,  and  another  tell, 
My  heart  detests  him  as  the  gates  of  hell. 

This,  however,  we  may  consider  as  in  great  part  be- 
longing to  the  single  character  of  Achilles.  It  is  a 
principle  worked  out  in  his  entire  conduct,  without 
a  single  flaw.  His  soul  and  actions  are  sky-clear. 
Among  the  Homeric  deities,  there  is  nothing  that 
approaches  him  in  this  respect.  Indeed  it  is  espe- 
cially in  the  region  of  the  Immortals  that  we  find  the 
plague-spot  planted.  In  Athene,  by  far  the  loftiest  of 
his  Olympian  conceptions,  we  find  a  distinct  conde- 
scension not  simply  to  stratagem,  but  to  fraud :  and 
she,  with  Odysseus,  finds  a  satisfaction,  when  they 
respectively  allow  to  one  another  the  praise  of  excel- 
ling all  others  within  this  department,  she  among 
the  gods,  he  among  mortal  men.2 

At  this  we  may  not  be  greatly  surprised ;  for  force 
and  energy  already  outweigh  the  moral  element  in  the 
whole  conception  of  the  supernatural:  and  the  char- 
acter of  Odysseus,  with  its  many  and  great  virtues,  has 
a  bias  in  this  direction.  But  we  may  be  much  more 
surprised  to  find  what  we  may  fairly  call  a  glorifica- 
tion of  cunning,  if  not  of  fraud,  exhibited  in  the  char- 
acter of  that  Greek  chieftain,  who,  next  to  Achilles, 
may  be  thought  most  to  approximate  to  the  ideal  of 
Homeric  chivalry.  Diomed  meets  the  noble  Glaucos 
on  the  field  :  they  explain,  and  recognize  as  subsisting 


i  II.  ix.  312  (Pope,  v.  412). 


2  Od.  xiii.  294  seqq. 


390 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


between  them,  the  laws  of  hereditary  guestship.  The 
Greek  then  proposes  the  exchange  of  arms,  which 
Glaucos  accepts :  and  Diomed  obtains  the  value  of  a 
hundred  oxen  in  return  for  the  value  of  nine. 

We  may,  however,  observe,  that  Achilles,  in  whom 
comes  out  the  bright  blaze  of  perfect  openness  and 
truth,  is  not  only  the  Coryphaeus  of  the  Greek  band 
of  heroes,  but  he  is  above  all  things  the  type  of 
Hellenism ;  the  model  of  that  character,  which  Homer 
considered  to  belong  to  his  race.  And,  as  far  as  we 
can  perceive,  though  there  is  a  delight  in  the  use  of 
deceit  as  stratagem  for  a  particular  end,  the  general 
course  of  thought  is  unreserved  and  open  :  the  Poems 
show  us  nothing  like  life  in  a  mask. 

The  idea  of  sin,  considered  as  an  offence  against 
the  divine  order,  has  by  no  means  been  effaced  from 
the  circle  of  moral  ideas  in  Homer.  It  seems  to  be 
strongly  implied  in  the  word  draadali?],  which  is  applied 
to  deep,  deliberate  wickedness ;  to  sinning  against 
light ;  to  doing  what,  but  for  a  guilty  ignorance,  we 
must  know  to  be  wrong.  For,  when  it  is  intended  to 
let  in  any  allowance  for  mere  weakness,  or  for  solici- 
tation from  without,  or  for  a  simply  foolish  blindness, 
then  the  word  atrj  is  used.  And  I  doubt  whether,  in 
any  one  instance  throughout  the  Poems,  these  two 
designations  are  ever  applied  to  one  and  the  same  mis- 
conduct. It  is  certainly  contrary  to  the  general,  and 
almost  universal,  rule.  The  atasthalie  is  something 
done  with  clear  sight  and  knowledge,  with  the  full  and 
conscious  action  of  the  will :  it  is  something  regarded 
as  wholly  without  excuse,  as  tending  to  an  entire  moral 
deadness,  and  as  entailing  final  punishment  alike  with- 
out warning  and  without  mercy.   Nothing  can  account 


ETHICS  OF  THE  HEROIC  AGE. 


391 


for  the  introduction  into  a  moral  code  of  a  form  of 
offence  conceived  with  such  intensity,  and  ranked  so 
high,  except  the  belief  that  the  man  committing  it  had 
deliberately  set  aside  that  inward  witness  to  truth  and 
righteousness  which  is  supplied  by  the  law  of  our 
nature,  and  in  the  repudiation  of  which  the  universal 
and  consentient  voice  of  mankind  has  always  placed 
the  most  awful  responsibility,  the  extremest  degree  of 
guilt,  that  the  human  being  can  incur. 

The  wicked  man,  thus  hardened  in  his  deliberate 
wickedness  (ataaOaXiri)^  is  then  driven  on  by  the  deity, 
that  is,  as  we  should  say,  by  a  divine  order  and  dis- 
pensation, in  his  mad  career.  Of  this  penal  mechan- 
ism Athene^  is,  in  the  Odyssey,  the  instrument.  .  When 
the  stool  has  been  hurled  at  Odysseus  disguised  in  his 
own  house,  and  the  insolence  of  the  Suitors  has  reached 
its  height,  Telemachos  tells  them  4  ye  are  mad  with  ex- 
cess of  food  and  wine :  some  deity  now  drives  you.' 1 
Before  this  we  are  told  'Athene^  would  not  let  the 
haughty  Suitors  stop  in  their  biting  insolence.' 2  And 
when  Amphinomos  has  received  the  friendly  but  very 
solemn  warning  of  Odysseus,3  he  is  shaken  inwardly, 
and  a  presentiment  of  calamity  presses  on  him.  Here 
the  Poet  goes  beyond  that  4  hardening  of  Pharaoh's 
heart,'  with  which  a  comparison  is  naturally  suggested, 
and  indicates  that,  even  while  he  was  suffering  this 
pain,  which  may  almost  be  construed  into  a  state  of 
indecision,  Athend  held  him  entangled  inwardly  in  the 
meshes  of  his  guilt,  that  he  might  be  conquered  by 
Telemachos.4  The  subsequent  attempt  of  Amphi- 
nomos to  restrain  outrageous  excess  appears  to  show, 


1  Od.  xviii.  406. 
3  Od.  xviii.  125-150. 


2  Od.  xviii.  346. 
4  Od.  xviii.  155. 


392 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


that  he  was  still  at  this  time  halting  between  two 
opinions.  The  sentiment  of  the  Poet,  usually  so  just, 
appears  here  even  to  tremble  on  the  verge  of  a  dark 
fatalism.  But  this  belongs  to  ulterior  and  later  pro- 
cesses of  thought.  What  we  have  here  to  notice  is, 
how  very  deeply  the  idea  of  moral  guilt  was  engraven 
in  the  mind  of  the  Poet,  and  therefore  probably  of 
his  age. 

The  peculiar  word  atasthalie  is  chiefly  used  by 
Homer  to  describe  the  prolonged  and  hardened  wicked- 
ness of  the  Suitors.  The  weakest  case  of  its  applica- 
tion is  to  the  obstinate  folly  of  Hector  in  refusing  the 
counsel  of  Poludamas,  and  thus  ruining  the  Trojan 
cause : 1  but  here  it  is  applied  by  the  hero  himself,  not 
by  any  one  else  to  him. 

The  view  of  patience  in  the  Ethics  of  Homer  is  a 
very  noble  one.  It  is  with  him  a  prime  virtue.  In- 
deed, the  characteristic  merit  of  one  of  the  Protagonists, 
Odysseus,  is  to  be  patient  (nolvrlag)^  as  his  distinguish- 
ing intellectual  endowment  is  to  be  nokv^xiq ;  resource- 
ful, elastic,  versatile.  This  patience  of  the  Homeric 
hero  is  as  far  as  possible  from  being  a  mere  acquiescence 
in  fatality,  or  a  cowardly  retirement  from  the  battle 
of  life  in  order  to  put  the  soul  to  sleep.  It  is  full  of 
reason  and  feeling ;  it  involves  and  largely  partakes  of 
self-restraint ;  it  might  almost  be  defined  as  moral 
courage.  It  is  an  active,  not  a  passive  function  of  the 
mind.  Its  action,  indeed,  is  generally  confined  to  the 
inward  sphere.  Yet  it  is  not  always  so  confined.2  And 
it  is  always  on  the  verge  of,  and  ever  capable  of  being 
developed  into,  the  most  heroic  energy. 


i  II.  xxii.  104. 


2  II.  xxiv.  505. 


ETHICS  OP  THE  HEROIC  AGE. 


393 


The  sense  of  justice  is  also  very  strong  in  the  poems. 
Agamemnon  indeed  is  unjust,  as  well  as  rapacious ; 
but,  notwithstanding  his  sense  of  responsibility,  and 
his  fraternal  affection,  Agamemnon  is  not  a  character 
towards  whom  Homer  intends  to  attract  our  sympathies. 
The  Greek  chieftains  seem  never  among  themselves  to 
deviate  from  fairness,  except  in  the  case  of  the  chariot- 
race.  It  is  singular  that  three  thousand  years  ago,  as 
now,  horse-racing  should  have  been  found  to  offer  the 
subtlest  temptations  to  the  inward  integrity  of  man. 
The  winning  positions  of  Diomed 1  and  Eumelos  in  the 
race  are  reversed  by  a  divine  intervention,  which 
throws  Eumelos  into  the  very  last  place.  And  it  seems 
to  be  from  a  sense  of  substantial  justice  that  Achilles 
proposes  to  commit  what  would  have  been  a  technical 
breach  of  it  by  giving  him  the  second  honor.  But 
Antilochos,  who  has  gained  the  third  place  against 
Menelaos  by  a  sheer  trick,  remonstrates;  and  Achilles, 
with  his  supreme  courtesy,  introduces  for  Eumelos  an 
additional  prize  to  avoid  even  the  semblance  of  wrong. 
Then  comes  the  turn  of  Menelaos,  who  vehemently 
protests  against  the  proceeding  of  Antilochos.  The 
young  warrior,  who  had  been  greatly  excited  against 
Eumelos,  at  once  acknowledges  the  justice  of  the  com- 
plaint, and  offers  to  give  Menelaos  not  only  the  prize  in 
question,  but  anything  else  that  he  possesses,  rather 
than  offend  him.  Upon  this  Menelaos,  not  to  be  out- 
done in  the  contest  of  high  manners,  and  without  doubt 
recollecting  that  all  his  competitors  are  suffering  in  the 
war  on  his  behalf,  at  once  surrenders  the  second  prize 
and  takes  the  third.    Thus,  notwithstanding  the  device 


i  II.  xxiii.  373-402. 


394 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


effected  in  the  race  itself,  a  strong  sense  of  right  pre- 
dominates in  the  whole  scene  of  the  distribution,  and 
governs  the  final  adjustment. 

The  high  estimate  of  the  virtue  of  justice,  thus  ob- 
servable, perhaps  connects  itself  with  that  strong  po- 
litical genius  which  had  already  found  development 
among  the  Greeks,  inasmuch  as  justice  is  -to  political 
society  as  its  vital  spark.  But  again,  justice  is  moral 
symmetry;  and  in  it  the  exact  spirit  of  the  Greek 
would,  on  this  ground,  find  at  least  a  strong  specula- 
tive satisfaction,  which  would  help  to  determine  the 
habits  of  the  mind  and  life. 

The  idea  of  self-restraint,  which  seems  to  admit  only 
of  a  limited  application  to  the  order  of  deities,  is  ex- 
ceeding strong  in  the  Homeric  man,  where  he  at  all 
approaches  excellence.  Hence  we  find,  in  various 
forms,  excess  among  the  Immortals,  such  as  would  not 
have  been  tolerated  in  the  Achaian  circle.  The  howl- 
ing of  Ares1  in  pain  when  wounded,  his  loss  of  all 
power  of  reflection  on  learning  the  death  of  his  son,2 
and  the  license  which  prevailed  among  the  gods,  with 
only  few  exceptions,  in  matters  relating  to  sexual 
passion,  are  striking  examples.  But  the  same  observa- 
tion may  be  made  in  lesser  matters.  Inextinguishable 
laughter  is  excited  in  the  Olympian  Court,  when  the 
gods  see  Hephaistos  limp  about  to  minister  the  wine. 
But  the  Achaians  never  laugh  with  violence.  If  there 
could.be  a  case  warranting  it  at  all,  it  would  be  one 
like  that  of  Oilean  Ajax,  when  he  slipped  and  fell 
amidst  the  orolure.3  Even  here,  however,  self-control 
is  not  lost.  They  only  smiled,  or  laughed  mildly  or 
gently  (jdv  yekaaaav),  at  the  strange  predicament.4 

i  II.  y.  860        2  H.  xv.  115.        3  H.  xxiii.  777.        4  II.  xxiii.  784. 


ETHICS  OF  THE  HEROIC  AGE. 


395 


The  self-command  of  heroes,  which  is  thus  observ- 
able in  minor  matters,  extends  also  to  the  greatest. 
When  we  find  any  virtue  prominently  exhibited  in  the 
two  Protagonists,  we  may  without  more  ado  be  certain 
that  Homer  intends  to  give  it  a  very  high  place.  And 
by  far  the  greatest  instances  of  self-command  are  given 
us  in  these  two  characters.  On  this  basis  is  founded 
the  singular  courtesy  of  Achilles,  in  the  midst  of  his 
resentment,  to  the  heralds  who  came  by  order  of  Aga- 
memnon to  remove  Briseis.1  When  he  was  in  danger 
of  losing  himself  for  the  moment,  on  the  occasion  of 
the  First  Assembly,  a  divine  interposition  took  place  to 
enable  him  to  hold  his  equilibrium.  And  many  times, 
when  he  feels  the  tide  of  wrath  rising  within  him,  he 
seems  to  eye  his  own  passion  as  the  tiger  is  eyed  by  its 
keeper,  and  puts  a  spell  upon  it  so  that  it  dare  not 
spring.  When,  for  example,  he  is  sensible  that  the 
incautious  words  of  Priam  2  are  kindling  within  him  a 
fire  that  might  blast  the  aged  suppliant,  he  seizes  the 
•moment,  and,  ere  it  is  yet  too  late,  bids  him  to  desist. 
Whenever,  after  the  death  of  Patroclos,  his  mind  goes 
back  upon  the  thought  of  Agamemnon  and  the  wrong, 
he  breaks  sharply  away  from  the  subject.3  So  it  is  with 
this  tempestuous  character.  But  not  less  remarkable 
is  the  self-command  of  Odysseus.  This  extends  to  all 
circumstances :  it  suffices  alike  for  the  cave  of  Polu- 
phemos  ;  for  enforcing  silence  in  the  body  of  the  wooden 
horse ;  for  bearing  in  his  disguise  the  insults  of  the 
Suitors.  But  most  of  all  in  point  is  that  wonderful 
speech  in  answer  to  the  insolence  of  Eurualos,4  the 


i  II.  i.  329-336.  2  n.  xxiv.  560. 

3  II.  xvi.  60  ;  xviii.  112 ;  xix.  65.  *  Od.  viii.  165-1  85. 


396 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


Phaiakian  prince,  which  teaches  us  more  than  any  com- 
position with  which  I  am  acquainted,  up  to  what  a 
point  emotion,  sarcasm,  and  indignation  can  be  carried 
without  any  loss  of  self-command. 

The  fiery  Diomed  also  offers  us,  in  his  submission  to 
the  reproof  of  Agamemnon,  a  fine  example  of  this 
great  quality.1  But  in  truth  it  extends  to  the  army, 
that  is,  the  nation.  We  see  it  in  their  stern  silence  on 
the  march,  and  in  the  battle-field.  And  their  manner 
of  applause  in  the  Assembly  is  always  described  by  a 
term  different  from  that  which  the  Poet  uses  to  de- 
scribe the  corresponding  indication  of  feeling  among 
the  Trojans.  The  Greeks  usually  shouted  (htla%ov) 
their  applause ;  the  Trojans  rattled  or  clattered  it 
QmxelddriOav) . 

In  truth,  there  lies  at  the  root  of  the  Homeric  model 
of  the  good  or  the  great  man,  in  a  practical  form,  that 
which  Aristotle  has  expressed  scientifically  as  a  con- 
dition of  moral  virtue ;  a  spirit  of  moderation,  a  love 
of  to  (A860V,  or  the  mean.  There  should  be  moderation 
in  sorrow,2  moderation  in  wrath,  moderation  in  pleas- 
ure. Not  a  mean  between  extremes  of  mere  quantity ; 
but  a  true  mean,  an  inward  equipoise  of  the  mind, 
and  in  the  composition  of  mental  qualities,  abhorring 
excess  in  any  one  of  them,  because  it  mars  the  com- 
bination as  a  whole,  and  throws  the  rest  into  deficiency. 
This  sentiment  is  conveyed  by  Homer  in  a  multitude 
of  slight  and  fine  shadings  of  expression,  like  that 
insensible  action  of  the  hand  in  driving  which  keeps 
a  straight  instead  of  a  fluctuating  line.  We  trace  it  in 
the  frequent  expression  ovds  hmsv :  in  evaicipog :  in  the 


i  IL  iv.  411-418. 


2  II.  xxiv.  419. 


ETHICS  OF  THE  HEROIC  AGE. 


397 


nvY.ivov  heog  :  in  the  yQijv  fynedog  :  in  the  censnre  implied 
by  fir/a  sgyov,  and  in  a  multitude  of  other  expressions. 

This  being  so,  it  follows  that  one  of  the  qualities 
most  unequivocally  vicious  in  Homer  is  an  absolute 
implacability;  that  state  of  mind  towards  which 
Achilles  for  a  time  appears  to  lean  ;  first,  with  regard 
to  the  Greeks,  secondly,  with  regard  to  Hector  ;  to 
both  the  living  and  the  dead.  It  is  a  sin  against  Na- 
ture, rather  than  one  of  mere  infirmity ;  because  the 
very  first  requisite  of  such  a  feeling,  to  give  it  even 
colorable  justice,  is  that  the  person  entertaining  it 
should  himself  be  without  fault,  or  weakness,  or  short- 
coming of  whatever  kind. 

This  law,  of  moderation  in  quantity,  was  bodily  as 
well  as  mental.  Homer  sings  the  praises  of  wine  ; 
but  he  reprehends  even  that  mild  form  of  excess  which 
does  no  more  than  promote  garrulity.1  When  the 
Greeks  are  about  to  suffer  calamity  in  the  Return,  he 
lets  them  go  in  a  state  of  drunkenness  to  their  Assem- 
bly.2 Elpenor  dies  by  an  accidental  fall  from  drunk- 
enness, and  his  character  is  accordingly  described  in 
terms  of  disparagement.3  A  legend  is  introduced  to 
show  the  mischief  of  this  vice,  which  even  the  Suitor 
Antinoos  condemns.4  No  character  esteemed  by  the 
Poet  ever  acts  in  any  matter  under  the  influence  of 
liquor.  It  was  for  him  the  dew,  not  the  deluge,  of  the 
soul ;  and  it  was  nothing  more.  The  gods  indeed  sit 
by  the  bowl  the  livelong  day  ; 5  but  for  men  it  is  not 
seemly  to  tarry  for  hours  at  the  sacred  (that  is  regular 
and  public)  feast.    And  this,  not  only  in  cases  like 


i  Od.  xiv.  463-466. 

3  Od.  x.  552-560 ;  xi.  61. 

5  II.  i.  601. 


2  Od.  iii.  139. 

4  Od.  xxi.  293-304. 


398 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


that  of  wine,  where  the  truth  is  obvious,  and  the  excess 
repulsive  ;  but  in  instances  where  it  would  less  be 
expected.  '  Do  not  go  to  bed  too  soon  :  excess  of  sleep 
is  itself  dnfj,  a  trouble.' 1  6  Do  not  admire,'  says 
Odysseus,  4  or  wonder  at  your  father  to  excess.'  2  6 1 
disapprove,'  says  Menelaos,3  6  of  excess,  either  in  at- 
tachments or  in  aversions  :  better  to  have  all  things 
in  moderation.'  The  exact  word  is  cc'impa,  according 
to  aha,  which  may  be  said  to  signify  the  moral  element 
of  measure,  order,  just  proportion,  in  fate. 

This  general  disinclination  to  excess  is  happily  ex- 
emplified in  relation  to  excess  of  wickedness. 

The  extremest  forms  of  human  depravity  are  un- 
known to  the  practice  of  the  Greeks  in  the  Homeric 
age.  We  find  among  them  no  infanticide ;  no  canni- 
balism ;  no  practice,  or  mention,  of  unnatural  lusts  : 
incest  is  profoundly  abhorred,  and  even  its  uninten- 
tioned  commission  in  the  case  of  Oidipous  and  Epicast£ 
was  visited  with  the  heaviest  calamities.  The  old  age 
of  parents  is  treated  with  respect  and  affection.  Sla- 
very itself  is  mild  ;  and  predial  slavery  apparently 
rare.  There  is  no  polygamy ;  no  domestic  concubi- 
nage ;  no  torture.  There  are  no  human  sacrifices ; 
and  even  down  to  the  time  of  Euripides  the  tradition 
subsisted  that  they  were  not  a  Greek  but  a  foreign 
usage.4  The  legend  of  the  seizure  of  Ganymedes, 
which  was  afterwards  deeply  tainted  with  shame,  is  in 
Homer  perfectly  beautiful  and  pure.  Adultery  is  de- 
tested. The  lifelong  bond  of  man  and  wife  does  not 
wholly  yield  even  to  violence  :  absence  the  most  pro- 
longed does  not  shake  it  off :  and  there  is  no  escape 

i  Od.  xv.  394.  2  od.  xvi.  202,  203.  3  Od.  xv.  70. 

4  Eurip.  Iphig.  in  Aul.  edog  p/  Trarpiov. 


ETHICS  OF  THE  HEROIC  AGE. 


399 


from  it  by  the  at  best  poor  and  doubtful  invention  of 
divorce. 

There  is  undoubtedly  something  savage  in  the  wrath 
of  Odysseus  against  the  Suitors,  as  there  is  in  the 
wrath  of  Achilles  against  Agamemnon  and  the  Greeks. 
Neither  of  these  two  is  represented  to  us  as  a  faultless 
personage.  But  when  they  err,  it  is  in  measure  and 
degree  ;  in  the  exaggeration  of  what,  as  to  its  essence, 
virtue  justifies,  and  even  requires.  But  an  exceeding 
nobleness  marks  the  rebuke  of  Odysseus  to  the  Nurse 
Eurucleia,  when  she  is  about  to  shout  in  exultation 
over  the  fallen  Suitors.  4  It  is  wrong,'  he  says,1  '  to 
exult  over  the  slain,  who  have  been  overthrown  by 
divine  providence,  and  by  their  own  perverse  deeds.' 

So  again,  while  Hecuba  wishes  she  could  find  it  in 
her  heart  to  eat  Achilles,  Achilles2  utters  a  similar 
wish  with  regard  to  Hector.  But  the  wish  is  that  he 
could  prevail  upon  himself  to  perform  the  act ;  which 
accordingly  he  cannot  do.  From  these  passages,  as 
well  as  from  the  case  of  the  Cyclops,  we  may  learn  that 
cannibalism  was  within  the  knowledge,  though  not  the 
experience,  of  the  nation  ;  that  it  might  even  come 
before  them  as  an  image  in  the  hideous  dreams  of  pas- 
sion at  seasons  of  extreme  excitement,  but  never  could 
enter  the  circle  of  their  actual  life. 

Indeed,  the  manifestations  of  mere  personal  revenge 
in  the  Poems  are  almost  wholly  among  the  divinities, 
not  the  mortals.  The  vengeance  of  Achilles  has  refer- 
ence not  to  an  arbitrary  or  imaginary  code,  but  to  a 
gross  breach  by  Agamemnon  of  the  laws  of  honor  and 
justice.    The  vengeance  of  Odysseus  vindicates  not 


i  Od.  xxii.  412. 


2  II.  xxii.  346. 


400 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


merely  the  duty  of  political  obedience,  but  the  violated 
order  of  society,  against  depraved  and  lawless  men. 

The  point,  however,  in  which  the  ethical  tone  of  the 
heroic  age  stands  highest  of  all  is,  perhaps,  the  strength 
of  the  domestic  affections. 

They  are  prevalent  in  Olympos ;  and  they  constitute 
an  amiable  feature  in  the  portraiture  even  of  deities 
who  have  nothing  else  to  recommend  them.  Not  only 
does  Poseidon  care  for  the  brutal  Poluphemos,  and 
Zeus  for  the  noble  and  gallant  Sarpedon,  but  Ar£s  for 
Ascalaphos,  and  Aphrodite  for  iEneas.  In  the  Trojan 
royal  family,  there  is  little  of  the  higher  morality  ;  but 
parental  affection  is  vehement  in  the  characters,  some- 
what relaxed  as  they  are  in  fibre,  both  of  Priam  and 
of  Hecuba.  Odysseus  chooses  for  the  title,  by  which 
he  would  be  known,  that  of  the  Father  of  Telemachos.1 
,  The  single  portraiture  of  Penelope^,  ever  yearning 
through  twenty  years  for  her  absent  husband,  and  then 
praying  to  be  removed  from,  life,  that  she  may  never 
gladden  the  spirit  of  a  meaner  man,  could  not  have 
been  designed  or  drawn,  except  in  a  country  where  the 
standard,  in  this  great  branch  of  morality,  was  a  high 
one.  This  is  the  palmary  and  all-sufficient  instance. 
Others  might  be  mentioned  to  follow,  though  none  can 
equal  it. 

Perhaps  even  beyond  other  cases  of  domestic  rela- 
tion, the  natural,  sentiment,  as  between  parents  and 
children,  was  profoundly  ingrained  in  the  morality  of 
the  heroic  age.  The  feeling  of  Achilles  for  Peleus,  of 
Odysseus  for  his  father  Laertes  and  his  mother  An- 
ticleia,  exhibits  an  affection  alike  deep  and  tender. 


i  II.  ii.  260. 


ETHICS  OF  THE  HEROIC  AGE. 


401 


Those  who  die  young,  like  Simoeisios 1  by  the  hand  of 
Ajax,  die  before  they  have  had  time  to  repay  to  their 
parents  their  threptra,  the  pains  and  care  of  rearing 
them.  Phoenix,  in  the  height  of  wrath  with  his  father, 
and  in  a  country  where  homicide  was  thought  a  ca- 
lamity far  more  than  a  crime,  is  restrained  from  offer- 
ing him  any  violence,  lest  he  should  be  branded,  among 
the  Achaians,  with  the  stamp  of  parricide.2  All  this 
was  reciprocated  on  the  side  of  parents  :  even  in  Troy, 
as  we  may  judge  from  the  conduct  and  words  of  Hec- 
tor,3 of  Andromache,4  of  Priam.5  While  the  father  of 
Odysseus  pined  on  earth  for  his  return,  his  mother 
died  of  a  broken  heart  for  his  absence.6  And  the 
Shade  of  Achilles  in  the  Underworld  only  craves  to 
know  whether  Peleus  is  still  held  in  honor ;  and  a 
momentary  streak  of  light  and  joy  gilds  his  dreary  and 
gloomy  existence,  when  he  learns  that  his  son  Neop- 
tolemos  has  proved  himself  worthy  of  his  sire,  and 
has  attained  to  fame  in  war.  The  very  selfish  nature 
of  Agamemnon  does  not  prevent  his  feeling  a  watchful 
anxiety  for  his  brother  Menelaos.7  Where  human 
interests  spread  and  ramify  by  this  tenacity  of  domes- 
tic affections,  there  the  generations  of  men  are  firmly 
knit  together  ;  concern  for  the  future  becomes  a  spring 
of  noble  action ;  affection  for  the  past  engenders  an 
emulation  of  its  greatness ;  and  as  it  is  in  history  that 
these  sentiments  find  their  means  of,  subsistence,  the 
primitive  poet  of  such  a  country  scarcely  can  but  be 
an  historian. 

i  II.  iv.  473-479.  2  ii.  ix.  459-461.         3  n.  vi.  476. 

4  II.  xxii.  438-507.         5  II.  xxii.  424.  6  Od.  xi.  196,  202. 

1  II.  x.  234-240. 

26 


402 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


We  do  not  find,  indeed,  that  relationships  are  traced 
in  Homer  by  name  beyond  the  degree  of  first  cousins.1 
But  that  the  tie  of  blood  was  much  more  widely  recog- 
nized, we  may  judge  from  the  passage  in  the  Second 
Iliad,  which  shows  that  the  divisions  of  the  army  were 
subdivided  into  tribes  (yvlct)  and  clans  (cpQtjtQai)  .2 
Guestship  likewise  descended  through  generations : 
Diomed  and  Glaucos  exchange  arms,  and  agree  to 
avoid  one  another  in  fight,  because  their  grandfathers 
had  been  xenoi.3 

The  intensity  of  the  Poet's  admiration  for  beautiful 
form  is  exhibited  alike  with  reference  to  men,  women, 
and  animals.  Achilles,  his  greatest  warrior,  is  also 
his  most  beautiful  man  :  Ajax,  the  second  soldier,  has 
also  the  second  place  in  beauty  according  to  Odysseus.4 
Nireus,  his  rival  for  that  place,  is  commemorated  for  his 
beauty,  though  in  other  respects  he  is  declared  to  have 
been  an  insignificant  personage.5  Odysseus,  elderly, 
if  not  old,  is  carried  into  rapture  by  the  beauty  of 
Nausicaa.6  Not  Helen  alone,  but  his  principal  women 
in  general,  short  of  positive  old  age  (for  Penelope  is 
included),  are  beautiful.  He  felt  intensely,  as  appears 
from  many  passages,  the  beauty  of  the  horse.  But  this 
admiring  sentiment  towards  all  beauty  of  form  appears 
to  have  been  an  entirely  pure  one.  His  only  licentious 
episode,  that  of  the  Net  of  Hephaistos,  he  draws  from 
an  Eastern  mythology.  He  recounts  it  as  sung  before 
men  only,  not  women ;  and  not  in  Greece,  but  in 
Scherie,  to  an  audience  of  Phoenician  extraction  and 
associations.    It  is  in  Troy  that  the  gloating  eyes  of 


i  II.  xv.  419-422,  525,  554. 
»  II.  vi.  215,  224—231. 
5  II.  ii.  671-675. 


2  II.  ii.  362. 
4  Ocl.  xi.  550. 
6  Od.  vi.  151-169. 


ETHICS  OF  THE  HEROIC  AGE. 


403 


the  old  men  follow  Helen  as  she  walks.1  The  only 
Greeks,  to  whom  the  like  is  imputed,  are  the  dissolute 
and  hateful  Suitors  of  the  Odyssey.  The  proceedings 
of  Here  in  the  Fourteenth  Iliad  are  strictly  subordinated 
to  policy.  They  are  scarcely  decent ;  and  a  single 
sentiment  of  Thetis  may  be  criticised.2  But  the  obser- 
vations I  would  offer  are,  first  that  all  the  questionable 
incidents  or  sentiments  are  in  the  sphere  of  the  my- 
thology, which  in  several  important  respects  tended 
to  corrupt,  and  not  to  elevate,  mankind.  Secondly,  how 
trifling  an  item  do  they  contribute  to  the  great  Ency- 
clopaedia of  human  life,  which  is  presented  to  us  in  the 
Poems.  Thirdly,  even  among  the  great  writers  of  the 
Christian  ages,  how  few  will  abide  the  application  of  a 
rigid  test  in  this  respect  so  well  as  Homer.  And  lastly, 
let  us  observe  the  thorough  rectitude  of  purpose  which 
governs  the  Poems  :  where  Artemis,  the  severely  pure, 
is  commonly  represented  as  an  object  of  veneration, 
but  Aphroditd  is  as  commonly  represented  in  such  a 
manner  as  to  attract  aversion  or  contempt :  and  when, 
among  human  characters,  no  licentious  act  is  ever  so 
exhibited,  as  to  confuse  or  pervert  the  sense  of  right 
and  wrong.  The  Poet's  treatment  of  Paris  on  earth, 
whom  he  has  made  his  only  contemptible  prince  or 
warrior,  is  in  strict  keeping  with  his  treatment  of 
Aphrodite  among  Immortals. 

With  regard  to  anything  which  is  unbecoming  in 
the  human  person,  the  delicacy  of  Homer  is  uniform 
and  perhaps  unrivalled.  In  the  case  of  women,  there 
is  not  a  single  allusion  to  it.  In  the  case  of  men,  the 
only  allusions  we  find  are  grave,  and  admirably  handled. 


i  II.  iii.  156-158. 


2  II.  xxiv.  130. 


404 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


When  Odysseus  threatens  to  strip  Thersites,  it  is  only 
to  make  him  an  object  of  general  and  unmitigated 
disgust.1  When  Priam  foretells  the  mangling  of  his 
own  naked  corpse  by  animals,2  the  insult  to  natural 
decency  thus  anticipated  serves  only  to  express  the  in- 
tense agony  of  his  mind.  The  scene  in  which  Odysseus 
emerges  from  the  sea  on  the  coast  of  Scheri£,  is  perhaps 
among  the  most  careful,  and  yet  the  most  simple  and 
unaffected,  exhibitions  of  true  modesty  in  all  literature. 
And  the  mode,  in  which  all  this  is  presented  to  us, 
suggests  that  it  forms  a  true  picture  of  the  general 
manners  of  the  nation  at  the  time.  That  this  delicacy 
long  subsisted  in  Greece,  we  learn  from  Thucydides.3 
The  morality  of  the  Homeric  period  is  that  of  the 
childhood  of  a  race :  the  morality  of  the  classic  times 
belongs  to  its  manhood.  On  the  side  of  the  latter, 
it  may  be  urged  that  two  causes  in  particular  tend  to 
raise  its  level.  With  regular  forms  of  political  and 
civil  organization,  there  grows  up  in  written  law  a 
public  testimonial  on  behalf,  in  the  main,  of  truth, 
honesty,  and  justice.  For,  while  private  conduct  rep- 
resents the  human  mind  under  the  bias  of  every  temp- 
tation, the  law,  as  a  general  rule,  speaks  that  which 
our  perceptions  would  affirm  were  there  no  such  bias. 
But  further,  with  law  and  order  comes  the  clearer 
idea  and  fuller  enjoyment  of  the  fruits  of  labor;  and 
for  the  sake  of  security  each  man  adopts,  and  in  gen- 
eral acts  upon,  a  recognition  of  the  rights  of  property 
These  are  powerful  agencies  for  good  in  a  great  depart- 
ment of  morals.  Besides  these,  with  a  more  imposing 
beauty,  but  probably  with  less  of  practical  efficacy, 


i  II.  ii.  262. 


2  II.  xxii.  74-76. 


3  i.  6. 


ETHICS  OF  THE  HEROIC  AGE. 


405 


the  speculative  intellect  of  man  goes  to  work,  and 
establishes  abstract  theories  of  virtue,  vice,  and  their 
consequences,  which  by  their  comprehensiveness  and 
method  put  out  of  countenance  the  indeterminate  eth- 
ics of  remote  antiquity.  All  this  is  to  be  laid  in  one 
scale.  But  the  other  would,  I  think,  preponderate,  if 
it  were  only  from  the  single  consideration,  that  the  creed 
of  the  Homeric  age  brought  both  the  sense  and  the 
dread  of  the  divine  justice  to  bear  in  restraint  of  vice 
and  passion.  And  upon  the  whole,  after  the  survey 
which  has  been  taken,  it  would  in  my  opinion  be  some- 
what rash  to  assert,  that  either  the  duties  of  men  to  the 
deity,  or  the  larger  claims  of  man  upon  man,  were 
better  understood  in  the  age  of  Pericles  or  Alexander, 
of  Sylla  or  Augustus,  than  in  the  age  of  Homer. 

Perhaps  the  following  sketch  of  Greek  life  in  the 
heroic  age  may  not  be  far  wide  of  the  truth. 

The  youth  of  high  birth,  not  then  so  widely,  as  now 
separated  from  the  low,  is  educated  under  tutors  in 
reverence  for  his  parents,  and  in  desire  to  emulate 
their  fame  ;  he  shares  in  manly  and  in  graceful  sports  ; 
acquires  the  use  of  arms  ;  hardens  himself  in  the  pur- 
suit, then  of  all  others  the  most  indispensable,  the 
hunting  down  of  wild  beasts ;  gains  the  knowledge  of 
medicine,  probable  also  of  the  lyre.  Sometimes,  with 
many-sided  intelligence,  he  even  sets  himself  to  learn 
how  to  build  his  own  house  or  ship,  or  how  to  drive  the 
plough  firm  and  straight  down  the  furrow,  as  well  as 
to  reap  the  standing  corn.1 

And,  when  scarcely  a  man,  he  bears  arms  for  his 
country  or  his  tribe,  takes  part  in  its  government, 


i  Od.  xviii.  366-375. 


406 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


learns  by  direct  instruction,  and  by  practice,  how  to 
rule  mankind  through  the  use  of  reasoning  and  persua- 
sive power  in  political  assemblies,  attends  and  assists 
in  sacrifices  to  the  gods.  For,  all  this  time,  he  has 
been  in  kindly  and  free  relations,  not  only  with  his 
parents,  his  family,  his  equals  of  his  own  age,  but  with 
the  attendants,  although  they  are  but  serfs,  who  have 
known  him  from  infancy  on  his  father's  domain. 

He  is  indeed  mistaught  with  reference  to  the  use  of 
the  strong  hand.  Human  life  is  cheap  ;  so  cheap  that 
even  a  mild  and  gentle  youth  may  be  betrayed,  upon  a 
casual  quarrel  over  some  childish  game  with  his  friend, 
into  taking  it  away.  And  even  so  throughout  his  life, 
should  some  occasion  come  that  stirs  up  his  passions 
from  their  depths,  a  wild  beast,  as  it  were,  awakes 
within  him,  and  he  loses  his  humanity  for  the  time, 
until  reason  has  re-established  her  control.  Short, 
however,  of  such  a  desperate  crisis,  though  he  could 
not  for  the  world  rob  his  friend  or  his  neighbor,  yet 
he  might  be  not  unwilling  to  triumph  over  him  to  higf 
cost,  for  the  sake  of  some  exercise  of  signal  ingenuity  ; 
while,  from  a  hostile  tribe  or  a  foreign  shore,  or  from 
the  individual  who  has  become  his  enemy,  he  will 
acquire  by  main  force  what  he  can,  nor  will  he  scruple 
to  inflict  on  him  by  stratagem  even  deadly  injury.1 
He  must,  however,  give  liberally  to  those  who  are  in 
need ;  to  the  wayfarer,  to  the  poor,  to  the  suppliant 
who  begs  from  him  shelter  and  protection.  On  the 
other  hand,  should  his  own  goods  be  wasted,  the  liberal 
and  open-handed  contributions  of  his  neighbors  will 
not  be  wanting  to  replace  them. 

l  Od.  xiii.  252-270. 


ETHICS  OF  THE  HEROIC  AGE. 


407 


His  early  youth  is  not  solicited  into  vice  by  finding 
sensual  excess  in  vogue,  or  the  opportunities  of  it 
glaring  in  his  eye,  and  sounding  in  his  ear.  Gluttony 
is  hardly  known  ;  drunkenness  is  marked  only  by  its 
degrading  character,  and  by  the  evil  consequences  that 
flow  so  straight  from  it ;  and  it  is  abhorred.  But  he 
loves  the  genial  use  of  meals,  and  rejoices  in  the  hour 
when  the  guests,  gathered  in  his  father's  hall,  enjoy  a 
liberal  hospitality  ?  and  the  wine  mantles  in  the  cup.1 
For  then  they  listen  to  the  strains  of  the  minstrel,  who 
celebrates  before  them  the  newest  and  the  dearest  of  the 
heroic  tales  that  stir  their  blood,  and  rouse  their  manly 
resolution  to  be  worthy,  in  their  turn,  of  their  country 
and  their  country's  heroes.  He  joins  the  dance  in  the 
festivals  of  religion  ;  the  maiden's  hand  upon  his  wrist, 
and  the  gilded  knife  gleaming  from  his  belt,  as  they 
course  from  point  to  point,  or  wheel  in  round  on  round.2 
That  maiden,  some  Nausicaa,  or  some  Hermione  of  a 
neighboring  district,  in  due  time  he  weds,  amidst  the 
rejoicings  of  their  families,  and  brings  her  home  to 
cherish  her,  *  from  the  flower  to  the  ripeness  of  the 
grape,'  with  respect,  fidelity,  and  love. 

Whether  as  a  governor  or  as  governed,  politics  bring 
him,  in  ordinary  circumstances,  no  great  share  of 
trouble.  Government  is  a  machine,  of  which  the  wheels 
move  easily  enough ;  for  they  are  well  oiled  by  sim- 
plicity of  usages,  ideas,  and  desires  ;  by  unity  of  inter- 
est ;  by  respect  for  authority,  and  for  those  in  whose 
hands  it  is  reposed ;  by  love  of  the  common  country, 
the  common  altar,  the  common  Festivals  and  Games, 
to  which  already  there  is  large  resort.    In  peace  he 


i  Od.  ix.  5-11 ;  xiv.  193-198. 


2  II.  xviii.  594-602. 


408 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


settles  the  disputes  of  his  people,  in  war  he  lends  them 
the  precious  example  of  heroic  daring.  He  consults 
them,  and  advises  with  them,  on  all  grave  affairs  ;  and 
his  wakeful  care  for  their  interests  is  rewarded  by  the 
ample  domains  which  are  set  apart  for  the  prince  by 
the  people.1  Finally,  he  closes  his  eyes,  delivering 
over  the  sceptre  to  his  son,  and  leaving  much  peace 
and  happiness  around  him.2 

Such  was,  probably,  the  state  of  society  amidst  the 
concluding  phase  of  which  Homer's  youth,  at  least, 
was  passed.  But  a  dark  and  deep  social  revolution 
seems  to  have  followed  the  Trojan  war  ;  we  have  its  work- 
ings already  become  visible  in  the  Odyssey.  Scarcely 
could  even  Odysseus  cope  with  it,  contracted  though  it 
was  for  him  within  the  narrow  bounds  of  Ithaca.  On 
the  mainland,  the  bands  of  the  elder  society  are  soon 
wholly  broken.  The  Pelopid,  Neleid,  CEnid  houses, 
are  a  wreck :  disorganization  invites  the  entry  of  new 
forces  to  control  it ;  the  Dorian  lances  bristle  on  the 
iEtolian  beach,  and  the  primitive  Greece,  the  patriar- 
chal Greece,  the  Greece  of  Homer,  is  no  more. 

Section  II. 

We  must  not  dismiss  the  subject  of  Ethics  or  mor- 
als without  considering  what  is  both  a  criterion  and 
an  essential  part  of  it,  namely,  the  position  held  by 
Woman  in  the  heroic  age.3 

Within  the  pale  of  that  civilization,  which  has  grown 


1  II.  ix.  580;  xii,  313.  2  Od.  xxiii.  281-284. 

3  For  a  fuller  exposition,  see  Studies  on  Homer,  Olympos,  sect.  9. 
See  also  Mr.  Buckle's  Lecture  on  Woman,  in  Frazer's  Magazine. 


ETHICS  OF  THE  HEROIC  AGE. 


409 


up  under  the  combined  influence  of  the  Christian 
religion  as  paramount,  and  what  may  be  called  the 
Teutonic  manners  as  secondary,  we  find  the  idea  of 
Woman  and  her  social  position  raised  to  a  point  higher 
than  in  the  Poems  of  Homer.  But  it  would  be  hard  to 
discover  any  period  of  history,  or  country  of  the  world, 
not  being  Christian,  in  which  women  stood  so  high  as 
with  the  Greeks  of  the  heroic  age. 

I  will  here  very  briefly  illustrate  this  proposition 
under  several  heads ;  and  first,  that  of  marriage  with 
its  accessories. 

The  essence  of  Homeric  marriage  seems  to  have 
lain  in  cohabitation,  together  with  a  solemn  public 
acknowledgment  of  the  relation  of  the  parties  as  man 
and  wife,  and  with  an  attendant  ceremonial  such  as 
is  represented  on  the  Shield  of  Achilles.  This  might 
apparently  be  preceded  by  cohabitation  with  the  in- 
tention of  marriage.  Hence  Briseis  is  called  by 
Achilles  his  wife;1  yet  in  the  very  same  speech  he 
speaks  of  himself  as  open  to  marriage  with  another 
woman;  and  Briseis,  in  her  lament  over  Patroclos, 
says,2  '  Thou  wouldst  not  let  me  weep,  but  saidst  thou 
wouldst  make  me  the  wife  of  Achilles,  and  take  me  by 
ship  to  Phthi£,  and  feast  (i.e.  celebrate)  my  marriage 
among  the  Myrmidons.'  So  that  the  full  accomplish- 
ment of  the  union  was  apparently  to  follow  the  ex- 
pected return;  and  she  was  in  the  meantime  a  wife- 
designate. 

It  is  in  the  interest  of  the  woman  that  the  law  of 
marriage  should  be  strict,  and  that  marriage  should  be 

1  II.  ix.  335,  340  seqq. 

2  II.  xix.  295  seqq.  I  omit  the  word  Kovpidcqv,  which  would  require 
a  discussion. 


410 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


single.  Among  the  Homeric  Greeks  we  have  not  the 
slightest  trace  of  polygamy;  or  of  a  woman  taken  from 
her  husband,  and  made  the  wife  of  another  man  during 
his  lifetime.  The  Suitors  always  urge  Penelope"  to 
re-marry,  on  the  ground  that  Odysseus  must  be  dead, 
and  that  there  is  no  hope  of  his  return.  A  shorter 
period  of  absence,  than  that  assigned  to  him,  is  recog- 
nized by  the  law  of  England  as  making  re-marriage 
legal.  A  presumption  of  death  brought  near  to  cer- 
tainty must,  under  the  conditions  of  human  affairs,  be 
taken  to  suffice;  for,  says  Butler,  with  a  sweep  of  com- 
prehensive wisdom,  '  Probability  is  the  very  guide  of 
life.' 1  But  in  the  case  of  Agamemnon,  there  was  no 
presumption  of  death  ;  and,  accordingly,  the  act  of 
Aigisthos  is  described  by  Zeus  as  a  double  outrage, 
made  up  of  two  crimes;  the  last  part  of  it  being  the 
murder,  but  the  first  the  simple  fact  of  the  marriage.2 

Even  the  violent  bodily  abstraction  of  the  wife,  as  in 
the  case  of  Helen,  does  no  more  than  destroy  the  mar- 
riage for  the  time.  When  she  is  recovered,  she  re- 
sumes her  domestic  place.  There  is  no  such  thing  as  a 
formal  and  final  dissolution  of  a  marriage,  except  by 
death.  In  the  narrative,  and  by  the  Trojans,  as  well 
as  by  herself,  Helen  is  called  the  wife  of  Paris ;  yet  we 
never  find  this  acknowledgment  in  the  mouth  of  a 
Greek.  Nay,  Hector  even  calls  Helen  the  wife  of 
Menelaos  : 3  but  this  may  mean  the  past  wife.  Mene- 
laos  never  treats  what  had  occurred  as  setting  him  free 
from  his  obligations  to  Helen.  And  the  long  resistance 
of  Penelope,  presented  to  us  in  the  Odyssey  as  a  central 


1  Introduction  to  the  Analogy. 
3  II.  iii.  53. 


2  Od.  i.  36. 


ETHICS  OF  THE  HEROIC  AGE. 


411 


object  of  our  interest  and  admiration,  could  not  have 
been  chosen  for  this  purpose  by  the  poet,  unless  it  had 
been  in  conformity  with  the  actual  Greek  idea  of  a  gen- 
uine and  lofty  virtue. 

Concubinage  is  practised  by  some  few,  and  as  far  as 
we  are  informed  only  by  few,  of  the  Greek  chieftains 
before  Troy:  yet  this  also  is  single.  Of  actual  domes- 
tic concubinage  we  have  no  example.  But  Agamem- 
non threatens  to  take  Briseis  home  with  him.1  This, 
however,  is  done  under  angry  excitement.  In  the  As- 
sembly, he  thinks  it  necessary  to  give  the  reason  of  a 
proceeding,  which  he  apparently  perceived  would  re- 
quire a  justification;  and  it  is,  that  he  prefers  her  in 
all  respects  to  Clutaimnestra.  But  we  have  no  trace, 
in  the  Eeturn,  of  any  chief's  carrying  a  concubine 
home  with  him.  The  wife  of  Amuntor  adopted  an  ex- 
treme measure  to  prevent  her  husband  from  falling 
into  a  lawless  connection;2  and  Laertes,  from  an  ap- 
prehension of  conjugal  trouble,  respected  the  maiden- 
hood of  his  young  bondwoman.3  These  instances,  if 
they  show  that  the  man  was  not  exempt  from  passion, 
bear  very  emphatic  testimony  to  the  position  of  the 
wife. 

The  relations  of  youth  and  maiden  generally  are 
indicated  with  extreme  beauty  and  tenderness  in  the 
Iliad;4  and  those  of  the  unmarried  woman  to  a  suitor, 
or  probable  spouse,  are  so  portrayed,  in  the  case  of  the 
incomparable  Nausicaa,  as  to  show  a  delicacy  and  free- 
dom that  no  period  of  history  or  state  of  manners  can 
surpass.5    On  her  return  home,  Alkinoos,  far  from  re- 


l  II.  i.  29,  113.  2  II.  ix.  451. 

4  II.  xviii.  567,  593 ;  xxii.  127,  128. 


8  Od.  i.  433. 

5  Od.  vi.  275-288. 


412' 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


proving  her,  thinks  she  should  have  shown  more  for- 
wardness to  entertain  the  shipwrecked  stranger.  We 
often  hear  of  a  parent,  who  gives  or  promises  a  daugh- 
ter in  marriage :  but  like  expressions 1  are  applied  to 
sons.  The  very  fact  that  the  profligate  and  violent 
Suitors  always  confine  themselves  to  a  moral  pressure, 
and  profess  to  submit  to  the  choice  of  Penelope,  is  of 
itself  a  probable  witness  to  the  recognized  free-agency 
of  the  woman  of  the  period. 

In  that  early  state  of  society  we  hear  of  no  such 
personage  as  an  elderly  bachelor  or  spinster.  Nor, 
within  due  limits  of  age,  could  there,  I  presume,  be  a 
prolonged  widowhood.  The  apparent  connection  of 
Helen  with  Deiphobos,2  after  the  death  of  Paris,  should 
probably  be  read  in  the  light  of  Trojan  usage.  But 
whenever  Penelope,  or  others  in  her  name,  contemplate 
the  death  of  Odysseus,  and  her  consequent  release,  that 
change  is  always  treated  as  the  immediate  preface  to 
another  crisis,  in  the  choice  of  a  second  husband. 

Marriage,  in  Homer,  is  the  very  pivot  of  life.  War 
is  the  deadly  enemy  of  woman.  On  the  capture  of  a 
city,  her  lot  is  exile,  and  the  conqueror's  bed.  The 
familiarity  of  this  idea  renders  it  remarkable  that  we 
should  not  hear  much  more  than  we  do  hear  of  con- 
cubinage among  the  Greeks  of  Homer.  Of  professional 
prostitution,  we  have  no  trace  at  all. 

As  the  restraints  imposed  upon  marriage  are  in  gen- 
eral among  the  proofs  of  its  high  estimation,  I  proceed 
to  observe  that  the  Greeks  regarded  incest  with  hor- 
ror, even  when,  as  in  the  instance  of  Oidipous  and 
Epicaste,  it  was  involuntary.     Passing  on  from  ex- 

i  II.  ix.  394.    Od.  iv.  10.  2  Od.  iv.  276. 


ETHICS  OF  THE  HEROIC  AGE. 


413 


treme  cases,  we  may  observe,  that  the  connection  of 
Phoenix  with  a  woman  at  once  presented  an  insur- 
mountable bar  to  the  unlawful  passion  of  his. father 
for  the  same  person.  It  appears  however  probable, 
though  not  certain,  that  Diomed  was  married  to  his 
mother's  sister.1  In  Scherid,  the  king  Alkinoos  had 
his  niece  for  his  wife  :2  but  this  is  in  the  Phoenician 
circle.  In  Troy,  Iphidamas  marries  the  sister  of  his 
mother.3 

It  is  observed  that,  in  the  classical  period,  the  law 
of  incest  in  Greece,  instead  of  being  tightened,  was 
relaxed.4  The  older  sentiment  about  it  is  the  more  re- 
markable, because  of  the  extreme  looseness  of  the  code 
applied  to  supernatural  beings.5 

A  series  of  words  for  the  different  relationships  by 
affinity,  includes  the  word  einater  for  the  husband's 
brother's  wife,  to  which  we  have  no  correlative  in  Eng- 
lish; and  the  terms,  in  which  these  relationships  are 
spoken  of,  testify  to  the  definiteness  and  solidity  of  the 
marriage  bond. 

We  have  a  single  case  of  a  woman  who  attempts 
the  breach  of  her  own  marriage-vow.  It  is  Anteia,  the 
wife  of  Proitos ;  but  the  family  was  Phoenician. 

Thus,  then,  we  have  in  the  Poems  a  picture  of  Greek 
marriage  as  to  its  unity,  freedom,  perpetuity;  as  to  the 
restraints  upon  it,  and  as  to  the  manner  in  which 
breaches  of  it,  and  substitutes  for  it,  were  regarded. 
This  picture,  so  striking  in  itself,  becomes  yet  more 
so  by  comparison  with  Eastern  manners,  even  as  they 
were  exhibited  in  the  Hebrew  race.    It  is  also  in  glar- 

1  II.  v.  412 ;  xiv.  121.  2  Od.  vii.  65,  66. 

3  II.  xi.  220-226.  *  Friedreich's  Realien,  iii.  2. 

5  II.  iv.  441 ;  xvi.  432.    Od.  x.  7. 


414 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


ing  and  painful  contrast  with  the  lowered  estimate  of 
woman  among  the  Greeks  of  the  classical  period,  and 
with  their  loathsome  immorality. 

More  important,  however,  than  any  particulars  is 
the  general  tone  of  the  intercourse  between  husband 
and  wife.  It  is  thoroughly  natural :  full  of  warmth, 
dignity,  reciprocal  deference,  and  substantial,  if  not 
conventional,  delicacy.  The  fulness  of  moral  and  in- 
telligent being  is  alike  complete,  and  alike  acknowl- 
edged, on  the  one  side  and  on  the  other.  Nor  is  this 
description  confined  to  the  scenes  properly  Hellenic.  It 
embraces  the  conversation  of  Hector  with  Andromache, 
and  is  nowhere  more  applicable  than  to  the  whole  char- 
acter and  demeanor  of  Nausicaa — delineations  prob- 
ably due  rather  to  the  Hellenic  experience  of  the  Poet, 
than  to  any  minute  observation  either  of  Phoenician  or 
of  Trojan  manners.  Of  rude  manners  to  a  woman 
there  is  not  a  real  instance  in  the  Poems.  And  to  this 
circumstance  we  may  add  its  true  correlative,  that  the 
women  of  Homer  are  truly  and  profoundly  feminine. 
As  to  the  intensity  of  conjugal  love,  it  has  never 
passed  the  climax  which  it  reaches  in  Odysseus  and 
Penelope. 

Presents  were  usually  brought  by  the  bridegroom ; 
dowries  sometimes  given  with  the  bride.  With  a  wife 
returning  in  widowhood  to  the  parental  home,  the  dowry 
returned  also.1  On  the  other  hand  it  would  appear, 
from  the  Lay  of  the  Net,  that  a  fine  was  imposed  upon 
the  detected  adulterer,2  as  well  as  on  the  manslayer. 
In  some  instances,  personal  and  mental  gifts  serve  in 
lieu  of  possessions,  as  recommendations  in  suing  for 
a  wife. 


i  Od.  ii.  132. 


2  Od.  viii.  348. 


ETHICS  OF  THE  HEROIC  AGE. 


415 


Lastly,  with  respect  to  the  employments  of  women. 

It  appears  to  be  at  least  open  to  question  whether 
they  were  not  capable  of  political  sovereignty.1  The 
suggestion  of  the  text  seems  to  be  that  Chloris  was 
queen  in  Pulos  when  Neleus  married  her ;  and  the 
mention  of  Hupsipule  with  Jason  is  best  accounted 
for  by  supposing,  conformably  to  tradition,  that  she 
reigned  in  Lemnos.2  On  the  departure  of  Agamemnon 
Clutaimnestra  was  left  in  charge,  with  the  Bard  as  an 
adviser  ;3  and  in  Ithaca  Penelope^  had  a  similar  regency, 
apparently  with  the  aid  of  Mentor.4 

Priesthood  appears  not  to  have  existed  among  the 
Hellenes  of  the  Homeric  age  ;  but  in  Troas,  where  we 
find  it,  a  woman  was  priestess  of  Athene\  This  was 
Theano,  the  wife  of  Antenor  ;  and  she  is  said  to  have 
been  appointed  to  her  office  by  the  Trojans.  The 
seizure  of  Marpessa,  or  Alcuon£,  by  Apollo,  may  have 
had  reference  to  some  religious  ministry  at  Delphi. 

The  domestic  employments  of  women  are  pretty 
clearly  indicated  in  the  descriptions  of  the  Palaces  of 
Kirke  and  of  Odysseus.  The  outdoor  offices  were 
performed  in  Ithaca  by  men,  who  likewise  prepared  the 
firewood,  killed,  cut  up,  and  carved  the  animals,  and 
carried  to  the  farm  the  manure  that  accumulated  about 
the  house.  The  Suitors  also  had  male  personal  at- 
tendants. The  women  performed  the  indoor  operations 
generally,  including  the  fetching  of  water  and  the 
grinding  of  flour. 

Another  employment  discharged  by  women  has  given 
rise  to  misunderstanding ;  namely,  their  waiting  on 


1  II.  vii.  468,  469.    Od.  xi.  281-285. 

2  II.  vii.  469.  3  Od.  iii.  263-268. 
4  Od.  ii.  225-227  ;  xix.  322;  xx.  129-133.    IL.  vi.  297-300. 


416 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


men  for  purposes  connected  with  the  bath.  Damsels 
of  the  highest  rank  performed  this  duty  for  strangers. 
But  the  delicacy  of  the  early  Greeks,  with  regard  to 
any  undue  exposure  of  the  person,1  was  extreme  ;  and, 
though  they  may  have  differed  from  our  merely  con- 
ventional usages,  it  cannot  be  imagined  that  they 
departed  from  propriety  in  a  point  where  a  people  far 
less  scrupulous  would  have  respected  it.  The  error  has 
lain  principally  in  failure  to  observe  that  in  the  words 
used  for  washing,  bathing,  and  anointing,  the  actual 
operation  is  described  by  the  middle  voice,2  and  the 
words  loud,  chri5,  nip  to,  in  the  active,  in  general 
signify  supplying  another  person  with  the  means  Sf 
performing  these  offices  for  himself.3  The  same  rule 
I  believe  to  hold  good  with  respect  to  the  word  which 
describes  dressing  after  the  bath  (ball 6). 

1  II.  ii.  260-264. 

2  So  Wakefield.    See  II.  x.  572-577  ;  Od.  vi.  96,  219,  220,  et  alibi. 

3  Od.  vi.  210,  218,  222 ;  vii.  296.  Even  Od.  x.  361  need  not  be  an 
exception. 


CHAPTER  XI. 


Polity  of  the  Heroic  Age. 

The  Poems  of  Homer  are  the  seed-plot  of  what  is 
best  and  soundest  in  the  Greek  politics  of  the  historic 
period.  Nor  are  we,  the  moderns,  and,  as  I  think,  the 
British  in  particular,  without  a  special  relation  to  the 
subject.  In  part  we  owe  to  these  ancient  societies  a 
debt.  In  part  we  may  trace  with  reasonable  pleasure 
an  original  similitude  between  the  Homeric  picture 
and  the  best  ideas  of  our  European  and  our  British 
ancestry.  What  are  those  ideas?  Among  the  soundest 
of  them  we  reckon  the  power  of  opinion  and  persuasion 
as  opposed  to  force  ;  the  sense  of  responsibility  in 
governing  men ;  the  hatred,  not  only  of  tyranny,  but 
of  all  unlimited  power  ;  the  love  and  the  habit  of  public 
in  preference  to  secret  action ;  the  reconciliation  and 
harmony  between  the  spirit  of  freedom  on  the  one 
hand,  the  spirit  of  order  and  reverence  on  the  other  ; 
and  a  practical  belief  in  right  as  relative,  and  in  duty 
as  reciprocal.  Out  of  these  elements,  whether  in  an- 
cient or  in  modern  times,  great  governments  have  been 
made.  The  Homeric  Poems  exhibit  them  all,  if  not 
in  methodical  development,  yet  in  vigorous  life. 

27 


418 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


Even  war  required  a  basis  of  right,  perhaps  rudely 
defined  ;  and  retribution  a  corpus  delicti.  Hence  the 
readiness  with  which  the  offer  of  Paris1  to  decide  the 
war  by  single  combat  is  accepted ;  and  hence  it  may 
be  that  when  Agamemnon  anticipates  the  death  of 
Menelaos  from  his  wound,  he  judges  also  that,  on  that 
event,  the  army  will  return  home. 

Personal  reverence  for  sovereigns  is  undoubtedly 
a  powerful  principle  in  the  governments  of  the  heroic 
age.  There  is  for  them  a  kind  of  divinity  that  doth 
6  hedge  a  king.'  Odysseus,  wishing  to  arrest  the  sudden 
impulse  of  the  army  to  return,  furnishes  himself  with 
the  famed  Sceptre  of  Agamemnon,  as  a  token  of  his 
title  to  be  heard.  This  principle,  which  has  survived 
almost  every  modification  of  political  forms,  could  not 
but  be  lively  at  a  period  when  probably  no  great  num- 
ber of  generations  had  passed  since  the  exchange  of 
nomad  for  settled  life.  For  society,  in  the  nomad 
stage,  has  something  of  the  organization  of  the  army ; 
and  it  is  still  either  in  view  or  in  actual  experience  of 
the  time  when  the  family,  forming  itself  around  its 
head,  had  not  yet  grown  into  the  tribe  ;  much  less  the 
tribe  into  the  people. 

But,  while  this  reverence  existed  under  all  social 
forms,  the  characteristic  difference  of  the  Homeric 
states  is  to  be  found  in  the  qualifications  by  which 
on  every  side  it  was  hindered  from  passing  into  excess. 
The  monarch  was  controlled  by  the  princes  or  chiefs 
assembled  in  the  council  ({iovlrj) ;  an  institution  which 
the  Odyssey-  mentions  in  ScheriS,  and  the  Iliad  (in- 
formally) in  Troy  ;  so  that  we  must  presume  it  to  have 


i  II.  iii.  96-112. 


POLITY  OF  THE  HEROIC  AGE. 


419 


been  in  the  view  of  the  Greeks  not  a  merely  local 
institution,  but  a  prime  element  of  human  society. 
The  mass,  however,  of  the  free  citizens  were  also 
called  together  in  the  Agor£,  or  Assembly,  to  consider 
any  matter  of  cardinal  importance  ;  and  appeal  was 
made  to  their  reason  in  speeches  which,  for  aptitude 
and  force,  to  this  day  extort  the  admiration,  and 
perhaps  defy  the  rivalry,  of  the  moderns. 

It  is  upon  a  just  balance  of  forces  that  good  govern- 
ment now  mainly  depends.  In  the  Homeric  age,  there 
were  no  detailed  or  even  defined  provisions  to  secure 
this  balance.  Even  the  name  of  law  (n-omos)  is  un- 
known, though  the  name  of  public  right  (the mis)  is 
familiar  and  revered.  Into  the  Greek  Constitutions, 
described  by  Aristotle,  a  multitude  of  expedients  for 
that  purpose  had  been  introduced  by  human  ingenuity. 
Yet  those  constitutions  were  subject  to  frequent  and 
most  violent  changes,  usually  attended  by  the  absolute 
ejectment  of  the  defeated  party  from  house  and  field. 
And  even  when  not  under  disturbance  they  commonly 
exhibited  a  strong  bias  towards  excess  in  one  quarter 
or  another.  To  the  Troic  period,  too,  revolutions  were 
not  unknown.  But  the  idea  of  government,  which 
then  prevailed,  was  perhaps  both  more  strongly  forti- 
fied by  religious  reverence,  and  likewise  better  founded 
in  reciprocal  duty,  than  that  of  later  times.  The  sepa- 
ration and  conflict  of  interests  between  the  different 
parts  of  the  community  had  not  become  a  familiar 
idea ;  particular  classes  did  not  plot  against  the  whole  ; 
we  hear  little  of  the  tyranny  of  kings,  or  the  insubordi- 
nation of  subjects.  A  worse  era  was  about  to  follow. 
As  in  the  case  of  the  Crusades,  so  during  the  War  of 
Troy,  the  absence  of  the  rulers  prepared  the  way  for 


420 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


social  convulsion.  And  Hesiod,  living  at  a  time  later 
probably  by  some  generations,  looks  back  from  his  iron 
age  with  an  admiring  envy  on  the  heroic  period. 

6  The  early  monarchies/  says  Thucydides,  '  enjoyed 
specified 1  prerogatives  ; '  and  Aristotle  assures  us  that 
they  were  monarchies 2  upon  terms,  and  depended  on 
a  voluntary  allegiance.  The  threefold  function  of  the 
King  among  the  Hellenes  was  (a)  chiefly  perhaps, 
though  not  exclusively,  to  administer  justice  3  between 
man  and  man ;  (6)  to  command  the  army,  and  (<?)  to 
conduct  the  rites  of  religion.  Sometimes  the  sover- 
eignty was  local,  or  subaltern ;  sometimes,  as  perhaps  in 
the  case  of  Minos 4  and  of  Priam,  and  even  of  Peleus, 
but  clearly  and  broadly  in  that  of  Agamemnon,5  it  was 
a  suzerainty  over  other  Kings  and  princes,  as  well  as  a 
direct  dominion  over  territory  specially  appropriated, 
and  perhaps  also  over  an  unclaimed  residue  of  minor 
settlements  and  communities.  Besides  the  towns, 
which  supplied  Agamemnon  with  his  division  of  the 
army,  he  claimed  to  dispose  of  the  sovereignty  of  other 
towns,  which  lay  in  the  south-west  of  the  Pelopon- 
nesos.6 

The  Homeric  Kings,  however,  constitute  in  the  Iliad 
a  class  by  themselves.  The  greater  part  of  the  chiefs 
do  not  bear  the  title  of  Basileus,  but  had  probably 
that  of  an  ax,  prince,  or  lord.  Some  of  these  were  like 
Phoinix  under  Peleus ;  but  most  of  them  in  no  other 
subordination  than  to  Agamemnon.  The  only  duty  to 
the  suzerain  of  which  we  hear  is  that  of  military 

i  i.  13.         2  Arist.  Pol.  iii.  14,  15,  ver.  10.         3  II.  ii.  201-206. 

4  Thucydides,  i.  4,  says  that  Minos  appointed  his  sons  to  be  local  or 
deputed  Governors. 

5  II.  ii.  108,  483  ;  xxiii.  890.  6  II.  ix.  149-153. 


POLITY  OP  THE  HEROIC  AGE. 


421 


service.  His  superior  rank 1  is  acknowledged ;  so  that 
both  he,  and  apparently  Menelaos,  on  account  of  his 
relationship,  are  termed  4  more  kingly  '  2  than  the  other 
Kings.  These  gradations  in  the  order  may  perhaps  be 
compared  to  those  of  a  modern  Peerage  or  Noblesse. 

The  King,  as  such,  stands  in  a  special  relation  to 
deity.  The  epithet  theios,  divine,  is  only  applied  to 
such  among  the  living  as  have  this  relation.  The  King 
is  also  Diotrephes,  or  reared  by  Zeus,  and  Diogenes,  or 
born  of  Zeus ;  and  these  titles  are  given  rarely  below 
the  kingly  order  even  to  a  prince  or  ruler,  if  of  inferior 
degree  or  eminence.  It  is  expressly  declared  that 
Kings  derive  the  right  to  rule  3  from  Zeus,  from  whom 
descended,  by  successive  deliveries,  the  sceptre  of 
Agamemnon.  In  the  Greek  army  the  Kings  alone 
seem  to  constitute  the  council  of  the  Generalissimo. 
Scarcely  on  any  occasion  does  a  ruler  of  the  second 
order  appear  there.  The  kings  are  called  Basilees, 
or  Gerontes  (elders),  or  perhaps  Koiranoi;  but 
the  leaders  at  large  are  Archoi,  or  Hegemones,  or 
(a^m^o)  the  aristocracy. 

In  the  Catalogue,  the  command  of  some  of  the  di- 
visions is  held  as  it  were  in  commission ;  or,  in  other 
words,  rests  with  two  or  more  persons  jointly  and 
severally,  on  a  footing  of  parity  between  themselves. 
But  wherever  there  is  a  King,  he  either  appears  alone, 
in  his  capacity  of  General,  as  Agamemnon,  Menelaos, 
Odysseus,  Nestor,  Achilles,  the  greater  and  the  lesser 
Ajax ;  or  with  other  leaders  who  are  distinctly  under 
him,  as  Diomed4  and  Idomeneus.5  These  nine  persons 


1  II.  i.  186.  2  ii.  ix.  leo  ;  x.  239. 

3  II.  ii.  101,  205.  4  ii.  ii.  563-566. 

5  The  Catalogue,  II.  ii.  645-652,  might  leave  doubtful  the  position 


422 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


are  the  only  undeniable  Kings  of  the  Iliad,  as  may  ap- 
pear from  comparing  together  II.  ii.  404-409,  II.  xix. 
309-311,  and  from  the  transactions  of  II.  x.  34-197. 
Particular  phrases  or  passages  might  raise  the  question 
whether  four  others,  Meges,  Eurupulos,  Patroclos,  and 
Phoinix,  were  not  viewed  by  Homer  as  being  also 
Kings.  Probably  his  idea  of  the  class  was  not  so 
definite  as  ours ;  but  on  the  whole  the  line,  which 
excludes  these  and  all  the  other  chiefs  from  the  kingly 
rank,  is  drawn  with  considerable  clearness.  The  King, 
as  viewed  in  the  Iliad,  must  be  a  person  combining 
three  conditions :  first,  he  is  subordinate  to  none  but 
Agamemnon ;  secondly,  he  has  in  all  cases  marked 
personal  vigor  and  prowess ;  thirdly,  if  his  dominions 
are  small,  he  must  either  be  of  surpassing  strength  of 
body  at  least,  like  the  Telamonian  Ajax,  or  of  vast 
powers  of  mind  as  well  as  limb,  like  Odysseus. 

Among  the  bodily  qualities  of  the  Kings,  one  is 
personal  beauty.  This  attaches  peculiarly  to  the  Trojan 
royal  family,  and  it  is  recorded  even  of  the  aged  Priam 
in  his  grief.1  At  the  head  of  all  stands  Achilles. 
Odysseus  has  this  endowment,  though  in  a  less  marked 
degree.  Ajax,  in  the  Odyssey,  appears  to  compete  with 
Nireus,  in  the  Iliad,  for  the  second  place.  It  is  never 
predicated  individually,  I  think,  of  any  single  man 
below  the  princely  station,  although  when  the  crew  of 
Odysseus  were  re-transformed  at  Aiaie"  into  human 
shape,  they  are  collectively  said  to  have  been  by  far 
larger  and  more  beautiful  than  before.2 

of  Meriones  ;  but  it  is  fixed  by  the  terras  depairov  and  oiraov,  applied 
to  him  in  II.  x.  58,  xxiii.  113,  el  alibi ;  which,  though  perhaps  more 
than  Squire,  means  less  than  Colleague. 

i  II.  xxiv.  631.  2  Od.  x.  396. 


POLITY  OF  THE  HEROIC  AGE. 


423 


Personal  vigor  is  also  a  condition,  not  only  of  as- 
suming, but  almost  of  continuing  in,  the  exercise  of 
sovereignty.1  Laertes  quitted  his  throne  at  a  time 
anterior  to  the  departure  of  Odysseus  for  the  war,  long 
before  the  period  of  decrepitude,2  and  probably  when 
his  activity  had  but  begun  to  diminish.  Achilles,  in 
the  Shades,3  inquires  whether  Peleus  still  occupies  the 
throne,  or  has  retired  from  it  on  account  of  his  years. 
Nestor,  indeed,  yet  occupies  the  royal  seat ;  but  perhaps 
it  is  on  account  of  his  notable  talents,  combined  with^ 
the  greenness  of  his  old  age.  The  word  aiz  eos,  which 
signifies  a  man  in  his  full  strength,  when  joined  with 
Diotrephes,  or  royal,  is  applied  to  princes  as  a  class, 
and  thus  testifies  to  the  custom  I  have  described.4 
Telemachos  was  the  proper  heir  to  his  father's  throne  ;5 
but  he  was  only  coming  to,  though  close  upon,  full  age, 
and  he  had  not  yet  assumed  its  privileges  at  the  point 
where  the  action  of  the  Poem  begins. 

Over  and  above  the  work  of  battle,  the  Prince  is 
peerless  in  the  Games.  Of  the  eight  contests  of  the 
Twenty-third  Iliad,  seven  are  conducted  entirely  by  the 
Kings  and  chiefs.  The  exception  is  the  boxing-match. 
And  Epeios,  the  winner  in  this  match,  himself  declares 6 
that  he  does  not  possess  the  gifts  necessary  for  dis- 
tinction in  battle  ;  an  indication  by  the  way,  among 
many,  of  the  immense  value  set  by  Homer  upon  skill 
as  compared  with  mere  strength.7  Tne  prizes,  too, 
which  are  given  in  the  boxing-match  appear,  when 
compared  with  the  other  rewards,  to  show  the  reputed 
inferiority  of  this  accomplishment. 

i  Grote,  Hist.  Greece,  vol.  ii.  p.  87.  2  Od.  xi.  174,  184. 

3  Od.  xi.  495.  *  II.  ii.  660.    Comp.  II.  xvi.  716. 

5  Od.  i.  386.         6  II.  xxiii.  670.         1  Comp.  II.  xxiii.  315-318. 


424 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


So  likewise  with  the  gifts  of  music  and  song.  Usu- 
ally, of  course,  we  look  for  them  to  the  Bards.  Upon 
the  Shield,  in  the  procession  of  youths  and  maidens 
who  bear  the  grapes  from  the  vineyard,  a  boy  attends 
them  to  play  and  sing,  probably  because  it  did  not 
comport  with  the  dignity  of  the  Bard  to  exercise  his 
art  while  in  bodily  motion ;  for  presently  we  come  to 
another  scene,  where  he  plays,  without  moving,  to  the 
dancers.1  There  are  but  two  certain  indications  of  (so 
to  speak)  amateur  song  and  playing.  The  lyre  which 
Achilles  used  was  among  the  spoils  of  the  city  of 
Eetion,  and  may  possibly  have  belonged  to  that  King 
himself.2  On  this  lyre  Achilles  himself  played  during 
his  retirement.    And  our  other  musician  is  Paris.3 

But  the  kingly  character  in  Homer  is  also  all-com- 
prehensive ;  and  it  sometimes  embraces  even  the 
manual  employments  of  honorable  industry.  Odys- 
seus, in  the  Island  of  Calypso,4  is  a  wood-cutter  and 
ship-builder :  Odysseus  on  his  throne  was  the  carpenter 
and  artisan  of  his  own  bed,5  so  elaborately  wrought : 
Odysseus,  in  disguise,  challenges  Eurumachos  the 
Suitor  to  try  which  of  them  would  soonest  mow  a 
meadow,6  and  which  drive  the  straightest  furrow  down 
a  four-acre  field. 

Such  were  the  corporal  accomplishments  of  the 
Homeric  King.  He  was  also,  in  the  exercise  of  higher 
faculties,  Judge,  General,  and  Priest.  In  addition  to 
all  these,  and  as  binding  them  all  together,  he  was  em- 
phatically a  gentleman.  In  Agamemnon,  indeed,  there 
is  a  half-sordid  vein,  which  mars  the  higher  type ; 


1  II.  xviii.  569,  604. 

3  II.  iii.  54. 

5  Od.  xxiii.  195-201. 


2  II.  ix.  186-188. 
4  Od.  v.  243,  261. 
6  Od.  xviii.  366-375. 


POLITY  OF  THE  HEROIC  AGE. 


425 


though  he  corresponds  in  general  to  the  eulogy  of 
Helen,1  as  a  good  King  and  a  valiant  soldier.  Nestor, 
Diomed,  Menelaos,  are  markedly  gentlemen  in  their 
demeanor.  The  character  of  Odysseus,  caricatured 
and  debased  by  the  later  tradition,  abounds  in  Homer 
with  similar  notes.  Quick  in  the  sense  of  undeserved 
reproof  from  his  chief,  he  appeals  only  to  the  con- 
futation which  his  conduct  in  the  field  will  supply.2 
When  grossly  insulted  by  Eurualos,  his  stern  and 
masterful  rebuke  is  so  justly  measured  as  to  excite 
the  sympathy  of  strangers.3  But  the  best  exhibition 
of  the  profound  refinement  inhering  in  the  character 
of  Odysseus  is,  perhaps,  afforded  by  the  scene  in  which 
he  first  appears  before  Nausicaa,4  after  his  escape  from 
the  devouring  waters. 

It  is,  however,  in  Achilles  that  courtesy  reaches  to 
its  acme.  In  the  First  Iliad,  he  hails  with  a  genial 
kindness  the  heralds  who  came  on  the  odious  errand 
of  enforcing  the  removal  of  Briseis,  and  he  at  once 
reassures  them  by  acquitting  them  of  blame  ; 5  though 
as  we  know 

'  The  messenger  of  evil  tidings 
Hath  but  a  losing  office.' 

In  the  Ninth  Book,  while  still  in  the  Wrath,  we  find 
him  bidding  the  envoys  of  Agamemnon  a  hearty  wel- 
come.6 In  both  cases  he  anticipates  the  new  comers 
with  a  speech,  of  which  the  promptitude  is  itself  a 
delicate  stroke  of  the  best  manners.  The  most  refined, 
however,  of  his  attentions  is  perhaps  that  shown  to 
Agamemnon,  after  the  reconciliation,  on  the  occasion 

i  II.  hi.  179.  2  II.  iv.  349-355.         3  Od.  viii.  165,  396. 

4  Od.  vi.  115  seqq.       5  n.  i.  334.  6  n.  ix.  137. 


426 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


of  the  Games.  It  was  difficult  to  exclude  the  chief 
King  from  the  sport  of  Kings  ;  inadmissible  to  let  him 
be  worsted  ;  impossible  either  to  make  him  conquer 
those  who  were  his  superiors  in  strength,  or  to  place 
him  in  competition  with  secondary  persons.  Achilles 
avoids  all  these  difficulties  by  proposing  a  ninth,  or 
supernumerary  match,  with  the  sling  ;  and  then  at 
once  presenting  the  prize  to  Agamemnon  with  the  ob- 
servation that,  as  his  excellence  is  known  to  be  para- 
mount, there  need  be  no  actual  trial.1 

Yet  these  great  chiefs,  so  strong  in  every  form  of 
power,  bravery,  and  skill,  can  upon  occasion  weep  like 
a  woman  or  a  child.  A  list  of  the  passages,  in  which 
the  tears  of  heroes  flow,  would  probably  by  its  length 
cause  astonishment  even  to  those  who  are  aware  that 
a  susceptible  temperament  prompted  them,  and  that  a 
false  shame  did  not  forbid  them,  thus  to  give  vent  to 
their  emotions.2  Every  one  of  them,  unless  it  be  the 
aged  Nestor,  would  be  included  :  we  should  find  there 
even  Agamemnon,  whom  we  may  probably  consider  as 
the  prince  least  richly  furnished  in  this  department  of 
our  nature. 

Thus  far  we  have  spoken  mainly  of  the  persons. 
The  office,  which  these  persons  bore,  was  hereditary, 
in  the  line  of  the  eldest  son.  Yet  though  the  practice 
prevailed,  the  definition  was,  in  this  and  in  other  cases, 
not  so  sharp  as  ours.  Menelaos,  the  brother  of  Aga- 
memnon, partakes  in  a  certain  limited  degree  of  his 
dignity :  is  specially  solicited,  with  him,  by  the  priest 
Chruses;3  receives,  jointly  with  him,  the  presents 
offered  by  Euneos 4  for  leave  to  trade  with  the  army  ; 

1  II.  xxiii.  884-897.  2  Comp.  Juv.  Sat.  xr.  131-133. 

3  II.  i.  16.  4  U.  vii.  470. 


POLITY  OF  THE  HEROIC  AGE. 


427 


and  is  held  more  royal  than  the  other  chieftains.1 
Probably  when  Thuestes  succeeded  Atreus,  it  was  on 
account  of  the  childhood  of  Agamemnon,  which  pre- 
vented his  fulfilling  the  conditions  of  strength  and 
vigor  necessary  for  holding  the  monarchy. 

The  case  of  Telemachos  supplies  us  with  an  express 
declaration  of  the  title  of  the  son  to  succeed  his  father.2 
But  Antinoos  the  Suitor,  at  a  time  when  Odysseus  was 
supposed  to  be  dead,  states  his  hope  that  Zeus  will 
never  make  the  youth  king  of  Ithaca.  The  answer  is 
far  from  claiming  that  unconditional  right  to  the 
throne  of  the  islands,  which  it  asserts  to  the  estates 
of  Odysseus;3  and  leaves  room  for  the  supposition, 
that  the  succession  was  liable  to  be  more  or  less  affected 
by  personal  qualifications,  and  by  the  assent  or  dissent 
of  the  nobles,  or  even  of  the  community.  Even  at  this 
time,  however,  Telemachos  assumed  in  the  Assembly 
the  seat  of  his  father. 

Telemachos,  indeed,  is  an  only  son.  But,  in  the 
case  of  the  Pelopids,  Agamemnon  appears  to  succeed 
to  the  paternal  throne,  and  Menelaos  to  governSparta 
in  right  of  his  wife.  Of  the  two  brothers,  Protesilaos 
and  Podarkes,  in  the  Catalogue,  the  former,  who  is  the 
elder,  commands  the  force  from  Phulake  and  its  sister 
towns.4  He  was,  however,  we  are  expressly  told,  braver, 
as  well  as  older.  The  position  of  Antilochos  in  the  Iliad 
as  the  elder  son  of  Nestor,  and  of  Thrasumedes,  after 
his  death,  in  the  Odyssey,  appear  to  be  sufficiently 
marked.5  In  four  cases  of  the  Catalogue,  pairs  of 
brothers  are  named  as  in  command,  without  any  dis- 
tinction formally  drawn  between  them. 


i  II.  x.  32  and  239. 
4  II.  ii.  695-708. 


2  Od.  i.  387.  3  od,  i.  396. 

5  Od.  iii.  412,  439-446. 


428 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


The  Olympian  arrangements  bear,  perhaps,  the  most 
emphatic  testimony  to  the  higher  dignity  and  authority 
of  the  elder  brother.  For  it  is  only  in  that  capacity, 
that  the  superiority  of  Zeus  is  confessed  by  his  juniors.1 
They  are  not,  however,  excluded  from  inheritance ;  and 
the  respective  provinces  are  taken  by  lot. 

On  the  whole,  we  seem  to  have  the  custom  or  law  of 
primogeniture  sufficiently, but  not  over-sharply,  defined. 

The  Homeric  King,  decked  out  with  attributes  almost 
ideal,  appears  before  us,  so  far  as  Greece  is  concerned, 
in  not  a  threefold  only, but  a  fourfold,  character;  besides 
being  Priest,  Judge,  and  General,  he  is  also,  as  King,  a 
great  Proprietor. 

Priesthood  is  a  function  touching  the  daily  course  of 
life.  Besides  the  solemn  and  public  sacrifices,  the  meat 
of  each  meal  is  an  offering ;  the  word  '  to  sacrifice,' 
hiereuein  is  used  as  meaning  '  to  kill ;'  the  animal 
ready  to  be  killed  is  hi  or ei on,  a  sacrifice.  Yet  there 
appears  to  be  no  professional  priest  among  the  Hellenes. 
We  hear  of  many  priests  in  the  Poems  :  but  of  none  of 
them  can  we  positively  assert  that  they  were  Greek. 
The  priest  is  referred  to,  together  with  the  prophet  and 
dream-teller,  in  the  first  Assembly  of  the  Iliad :  but  the 
Greeks  are  there 2  in  a  land  of  priests  ;  and  as  Achilles 
plainly  points  to  the  prophet  Calchas,  who  immediately 
afterwards  rises  to  speak,  so  it  is  probable  that  he  may 
point  to  the  priest  Chruses,  who  had  already  visited  the 
camp.  Among  the  chief  professions  of  a  Greek  com- 
munity, enumerated  in  the  Odyssey,3  the  priest  does  not 
appear.  Though  priests  are  wanting,  prophets  are  not; 


1  II.  xv.  204-207.    Od.  xiii.  142. 

2  II.  i.  62.  3  Od.  xvii.  383-385. 


POLITY  OF  THE  HEROIC  AGE.  429 

and  in  this  important  passage,  the  class  of  prophets  is 
the  first  named.  One  passage  only  speaks  of  priests 
within  the  local  limits  of  Greece  : ]  it  refers  to  a  gene- 
ration before  the  War  ;  and  it  is  quite  possible  that,  both 
then  and  subsequently,  there  may  have  been  priests  in 
Greece  of  Pelasgian  institution.  Wherever  there  was  a 
temenos,  or  glebe,  probably  there  was  a  priest  to  live 
upon  the  proceeds.  But  the  only  sacred  glebes  of  which 
we  hear  in  Greece  are  (I  think)  the  glebes  of  Spercheios 
and  of  Demeter,2  both  of  them  old  Pelasgian  deities. 

In  conformity  with  this  view,  we  find  that  among 
the  Hellenes,  in  the  public  and  solemn  sacrifices,  the 
priestly  office  is  performed  by  the  King.  Moreover, 
the  assistants  are  termed  neoi,3  young  men.  This 
supports  a  conjecture  suggested  to  me  by  the  resem- 
blance of  the  words, that  hierosand  geron  have  been 
originally  identical  in  root.  In  Greece  down  to  the 
present  day  the  monk  is  called  c  a  1  o-g  e  r  o  (the  French 
caloyer).  It  was  to  the  Father,  as  such,  that  in  the 
origin  of  society  the  offices  both  of  King  and  Priest 
generally  accrued.  To  the  Father,  in  the  time  of 
Homer,  the  ordinary  consecration  or  offering  of  the 
meal  appertains,  as  he  presides  at  the  domestic  board. 

The  office  of  the  Judge  seems  to  be,  more  than  any 
other,  proper  to  the  King.  It  probably  constituted  his 
only  official  employment  which  was  at  once  permanent 
(that  of  war  being  occasional),  and  of  a  nature4  to 
weigh  upon  the  mind.  But  it  should  be  understood 
as  including  all  deliberative  work.  On  the  Shield,5 
the  trial  of  a  cause  is  conducted  by  the  Elders ;  perhaps 

i  II.  ix.  575.  2  ii.  xxiii.  148  ;  ii.  696. 

3  II.  i.  463.    Od.  iii.  460. 

4  II.  i.  238 ;  ii.  204 ;  ix.  98 ;  xvi.  386.         *  n,  xviii.  506 


430  JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 

in  the  character  of  delegates.  Causes  must  have  been 
conducted  by  natural  equity,  or  by  what  in  Ireland  was 
called  Brehon,  that  is  judge-made,  law.  Probably 
custom  had  already  established  some  rules  with  respect 
to  fines  for  homicide  and  adultery,  if  not  for  other 
offences. 

The  duty  of  the  King  as  General  is  best  exhibited 
by  the  whole  plan  of  the  Iliad.  Here  the  King,  if  in 
full  vigor,  assumes  the  captain's  office  as  a  matter  of 
course,  and  quits  his  house  and  throne  to  discharge  it. 
Peleus,1  the  father  of  Achilles,  remains  at  home,  because 
he  is  disabled  by  old  age.  Nestor,  retaining  more  of  his 
bodily  vigor,  goes  to  war,  but  acts  in  the  camp  chiefly  as 
a  counsellor,  and  at  no  time  actually  handles  arms. 

Never  has  the  idea  of  regal  duty  and  responsibility, 
both  in  general,  and  with  respect  to  war  in  particular, 
been  more  nobly  set  forth  than  in  the  speech  of  Sarpe- 
don  to  Glaucos,2  in  the  Twelfth  Iliad ;  before  the  high- 
souled  speaker  proceeded  to  execute  what  was,  on  the 
Trojan  side,  by  far  the  greatest  exploit  of  the  War. 

Lastly.  In  consideration  of  the  duties  and  burdens 
of  his  office,  the  King  was  a  great  Proprietor.  A 
domain3  (temenos)  was  set  apart  for  him  out  of 
the  common  stock  of  territory  (from  temnein,  to 
cut,  to  carve  out).  The  class  had  apparently  two  other 
sources  of  revenue.  They  received  presents  from 
merchants,  for  leave  to  trade  ;  of  which  we  find  an 
example  also  in  the  Book  of  Genesis.4  The  practice 
of  offering  such  gifts  is  probably  to  be  regarded  as  the 

i  II.  xxiv.  487.    Od.  xi.  497.  2  H.  xii.  310-328. 

3  II.  xii.  313 ;  vi.  194  ;  ix.  578 ;  xx.  184.    Od.  vi.  293 ;  xi.  185 ; 

xvii.  299. 

4  xliii.  11.    II.  vii.  467-475.    Od.  vii.  8-11. 


POLITY  OF  THE  HEROIC  AGE. 


431 


germ  of  Customs-duties,  or  taxes  on  the  import  and 
export  of  goods.  The  other  was  from  fees  on  the 
administration  of  justice.1  Of  these,  we  have  the 
earliest  rudiment  represented  on  the  Shield  ;  where 
lay  two  talents  of  gold,  to  be  awarded  to  the  judge 
whose  sentence  in  the  cause  should  be  most  approved.2 
In  time  of  war,  too,  Agamemnon  was  charged  with 
appropriating  a  very  large  share  of  the  prizes  to 
himself.3 

But  the  King  was  expected  to  be  liberal  in  his 
official  entertainments,  so  to  call  them,  to  his  chiefs 
and  nobles,  over  and  above  the  general  duty  of  hospi- 
tality.4 This,  probably,  was  the  excuse  of  the  Suitors 
for  devouring  the  substance  of  Odysseus.  It  appears, 
at  any  rate,  that  friends  of  the  royal  house  frequented 
the  table  at  the  palace,  as  well  as  its  enemies,  though 
perhaps  not  so  constantly.5 

The  King  might  also  obtain  private  property. 
Laertes  lived,  in  his  old  age,  on  an  estate  thus  ac- 
quired.6 And,  in  the  First  Odyssey,  we  find  a  dis- 
tinction between  the  house  of  Odysseus  with  the  lands 
about  it,  to  which  Telemachos  was  to  succeed  as  of 
right,  and  the  kingly  dignity  with  whatever  might 
attach  to  it.7 

Such  was  the  position  of  the  King.  Agamemnon,  how- 
ever, was  a  King  of  Kings :  more  or  less  resembling 
what  we  now  call  a  Suzerain,  or  the  highest  feudal 
superior  of  the  middle  age.  Thucydides  is  of  opinion 
that  the  fear  of  him 8  had  more  to  do  than  good  will,  or 
than  the  oath  of  Tundareus,  in  the  formation  of  the 

i  II.  ix.  155.  2  ii.  Xviii.  508.  3  II.  ix.  333. 

4  II.  ix.  70.    Od.  vii.  49,  98.  5  Od.  xvii.  68. 

6  Od.  xxiv.  206.  1  Od.  i.  397,  402.  8  i.  9. 


432 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


confederacy  which  undertook  the  war  of  Troy.  Na- 
tional sentiment,  and  the  hope  of  booty,  might  also 
contribute  powerfully  to  this  extraordinary  effort. 
We  have,  however,  no  means  of  tracing  in  the  Poems 
any  interference  of  the  Suzerain,  beyond  his  own  proper 
dominions,  in  the  ordinary  government  of  the  country ; 
or  any  duty  owed  to  him,  except  in  war. 

The  general  reverence  for  rank  and  station,  the  safe- 
guard of  publicity,  and  the  influence  of  persuasion,  are 
the  usual  and  sufficient  instruments  for  governing  the 
army,  even  as  they  governed  the  civil  societies,  of 
Greece.  The  few  words  quoted  by  Aristotle1  from 
some  text  of  the  Iliad  which  was  current  in  his  day 
and  place,  signifying  that  Agamemnon  had  a  right  of 
life  and  death,  cannot  reasonably,  without  a  context,  be 
made  to  convey  a  theory  of  military  discipline  out  of 
harmony  with  the  tone  and  analogies  of  the  poem,  and 
belonging  to  the  definite  ideas  of  the  present  rather  than 
to  the  free  life  of  the  older  time.  Moreover,  as  these 
words  (jtaQ  yag  epol  ddvatog)  afterwards  disappeared  from 
the  text  of  the  Poem,  the  most  natural  inference  seems 
to  be  that  they  were  not  finally  approved  as  genuine. 

It  is  in  the  Assemblies,  that  the  great  transactions 
of  the  army  are  decided.  There,  arises  the  quarrel 
with  Achilles  :  there,  the  tumultuary  impulse  home- 
wards ;  there,  that  impulse  having  been  checked,  it  is 
deliberately  resolved  to  see  what  can  be  done  by  the 
strong  hand  against  Troy.  There  it  is  settled  to  ask  a 
truce  for  burials,  and  to  erect  the  rampart.  There  the 
second  proposition  of  Agamemnon  to  return  to  Greece 
is  made,  and  is  summarily  overruled.2    There  the 


1  Aristot.  Pol.  iii.  14,  15. 


2  II.  ix.  26-28,  50. 


POLITY  OF  THE  HEROIC  AGE. 


433 


Council  is  appointed  to  sit,  which  despatches  the 
abortive  mission  to  Achilles.  There  Agamemnon  con- 
fesses and  laments  his  fault,  and  the  reconciliation  with 
the  great  chief  is  sealed.  There,  finally,  arises  the 
dissension  of  the  two  sons  of  Atreus,  after  the  fall  of 
Troy.1 

The  ranks  traceable  in  the  army  are  : 

1.  The  Kings:  Basileis  or  Koiranoi. 

2.  The  Leaders  under  the  rank  of  King. 

3.  The  officers  of  minor  command. 

Both  these  last  come  under  the  name  ofhegemones.- 
The  ships  had  each  her  kubernetes  or  pilot,  who 
probably  commanded  as  well  as  steered :  and  there 
were  a  number  of  t  ami  a  i,  or  stewards,  whom  we  may 
regard  as  the  commissariat  of  that  day.2 

The  privates  of  the  army  are  called  by  the  names 
of  1  a  o  s,  the  people  ;  demos,  the  community ;  and 
pie  thus,  the  multitude.  But  no  notice  is  taken, 
throughout  the  Poem,  of  the  exploits  of  any  soldier 
below  the  rank  of  a  high  officer.  Still,  all  attend  the 
Assemblies.  On  the  whole,  the  Greek  host  is  not  so 
much  an  army,  as  a  community  in  arms. 

On  the  nature  of  the  arms  employed  by  the  bulk  of 
the  force,  it  is  not  easy  to  pronounce  with  confidence. 
There  were  heavy-armed,  who  fought  with  spear, 
sword,  axe,  and  stone  ;  javelin-men,  who  used  a  lighter 
dart;  archers;  and  hippeis,  those  who  fought  from 
the  chariot.  Though  the  art  of  riding,  in  our  sense 
of  it,  was  known,  it  was  not  used  in  battle.  One 
passage  appears  to  speak  of  the  Trojans  as  attacking 
with  javelins  and  arrows,  and  of  the  Greeks  as  resist- 


i  Od.  iii.  139. 


28 


2  II.  xix.  42-45. 


434 


<    JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


ing  with  the  weapons  proper  to  the  heavy-armed  ; 1 
another  distinctly  describes  the  first  in  the  same  man- 
ner :  2  and  on  the  whole  I  judge  that  the  Greek  soldiery  ; 
with  its  solid  march,  were  combatants,  in  the  main, 
using  weapons  of  weight ;  the  Trojans  somewhat  less 
so.  Only  the  Trojans  distinguish  themselves  as  archers 
in  the  persons  of  Pandaros  and  Paris :  but  there  were 
bowmen  in  the  Greek  army  also.3 

Two  modes  of  fighting  were  in  use :  the  open  battle 
of  main  force,  without  strategy  or  tactics,  and  liable  to 
panic.  The  other  was  the  lochos,  or  ambuscade.  As 
a  severer  trial  of  nerve  and  moral  fortitude,  this  latter 
was  held  in  higher  estimation,  and  was  reserved  to  the 
chiefs.4  We  must  not  say  that  Achilles  would  have 
been  inferior  to  any  man  in  any  act  of  martial  skill 
or  daring :  but  in  the  Poems,  as  they  stand,  Odysseus 
has  been  chosen  as  the  prince  of  ambush.5 

The  Council  was  composed  of  chief  persons,  who 
bore  the  name  of  gero  ntes,6  or  elders  :  a  name  which 
was  probably  in  its  origin  personal,  and  had  by  degrees 
become,  like  that  of  Senator  in  later  times,  official. 
In  the  Council  of  the  Army,  Nestor  is  old,  Idomeneus 
near  upon  old  age :  Odysseus  might  be  called  elderly, 
though  still  in  the  perfection  of  strength.7 

In  the  Second  Book,  the  Boule  or  Council  is  sum- 
moned by  Agamemnon,  to  prepare  for  the  Assembly.8 
The  same  persons  meet  before  the  solemn  sacrifice,9 
without  being  called  a  Council.   They  meet  again,  as  a 

1  II.  xv.  707-712.  2  Od.  xviii.  261-264. 

3  H.  ii.  720 ;  iii.  79. 

4  II.  xviii.  509-520 ;  xiii.  276-286 ;  i.  227. 

5  Od.  iv.  277-288.  6  II.  ii.  53.  7  II.  xxiii.  791. 
8  II.  ii.  53.                          9  II.  ii.  404-408. 


POLITY  OF  THE  HEROIC  AGE. 


435 


Council,  by  appointment  of  the  Assembly,  in  the  Ninth 
Book  ; 1  and  send  the  Envoys  to  supplicate  Achilles. 
In  the  Seventh  Book,  this  body  plans  the  truce  and  the 
rampart.2  It  is  spoken  of  as  an  institution  evidently 
familiar.3  The  disorganized  society  of  Ithaca  does  not 
afford  scope  for  a  regular  Council ;  but  a  place  is  set 
apart  for  the  elders  in  the  Agore,4  and  Odysseus  in  his 
youth  had  been  sent  on  a  mission  by  Laertes  and  his 
Council.5  In  Scherie,  Nansicaa  meets  her  father6  on 
his  way  to  the  Boule\  The  members  of  the  Army- 
council  contend  freely  in  argument  with  Agamemnon  ; 
and  Nestor  takes  the  lead  in  that  body,  and  observes 
to  Agamemnon  that  it  is  his  duty  to  listen  as  well  as  to 
speak,  and  to  adopt  the  plans  of  others  when  they  are 
good.7  This  institution  was  one  utterly  at  variance 
with  anything  like  absolutism  in  the  command. 

In  the  Homeric  ideas  upon  Polity,  perhaps  the  most 
remarkable  of  all  is  the  distinction  accorded  to  the 
power  of  speech.  The  voice  and  the  sword  are  the 
twin  powers,  by  which  the  Greek  world  is  governed ; 
and  there  is  no  precedency  of  rank  between  them. 
The  power  of  public  speech  is  essentially  a  power  over 
large  numbers ;  and,  wherever  it  prevails,  it  is  the 
surest  test  of  the  presence  of  the  spirit  and  practice 
of  freedom.  The  world  has  repeatedly  seen  absolutism 
deck  itself  with  the  titles  and  mere  forms  of  liberty, 
or  seek  shelter  under  its  naked  abstractions  ;  but  from 
the  use  of  free  speech  as  the  instrument  of  governing 
the  people,  it  has  always  shrunk  with  an  instinctive 
horror.    The  epithets  and  incidental  passages  with 

1  II.  ix.  10,  89.  2  n.  vii.  344,  382.  3  Od.  iii.  127. 

4  Od.  ii.  14.  5  Od.  xxi.  21.  6  od.  vi.  53-55. 

7  II.  ix.  100-102. 


436 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI.  , 


which  Homer  honors  it,  show  much  of  his  mind.1 
But  the  most  emphatic  testimony  to  its  importance, 
and  to  the  state  of  things  which  it  betokens,  is  the 
free,  signal,  and  varied  excellence  of  the  Homeric 
Speeches. 

In  the  case  of  speakers,  Homer  is  less  chary  of  de- 
scription than  his  wont :  and  he  has  exhibited  to  us 
in  action  too  a  great  variety  of  manners.  There  is 
Thersites,  glib,  vain,  and  saucy.2  There  is  Tele- 
machos,  full  of  the  gracious  diffidence  of  youth,  but 
commended  by  Nestor  for  a  power  and  a  tact  of  ex- 
pression beyond  his  years.3  Menelaos  harangues  with 
a  laconic  ease.4  We  have  the  Trojan  elders,  whose 
volubility,  and  their  shrill  thread  of  voice,  Homer  com- 
pares to  the  chirp  of  grasshoppers.5  Nestor's  tones 
of  happy  and  benevolent  egotism  flow  sweeter  than  a 
stream  of  honey.6  Phoinix  would,  in  unskilful  hands, 
have  been  a  pale  reflex  of  Nestor's  garrulity  without 
his  sagacity  ;  but  his  speaking  is  redeemed  by  his  pro- 
found and  absorbing  affection  for  Achilles,  which  gives 
him  as  it  were  a  different  centre  of  gravity.  Far  above 
all  these  soars  Odysseus,  who  when  he  first  rises,  with 
all  his  energies  concentrated  within  him,  seems  to  give 
no  promise  of  display ;  but  when  his  deep  voice  issues 
from  his  chest,  and  his  words  drive  like  the  flakes  of 
winter  snow,  then,  says  the  Poet,  for  mortal  to  compete 
with  him  is  hopeless.7 

But  yet  there  is  another  speaker  who,  when  lie  rises 
to  his  noblest,  seems  as  though  he  were  scarcely  mortal. 
Homer  leaves  the  eloquence  of  Achilles  to  stand  self- 

1  II.  i.  490  ;  ix.  438-443.    Od.  xi.  510-516 ;  ii.  150  ;  viii.  170-173. 

2  II.  ii.  212.  3  od.  iii.  23,  124.  4  II.  iii.  213. 

5  II.  iii.  150.  6  II.  i.  249.  ?  ii.  Hi.  216-223. 


POLITY  OF  THE  HEROIC  AGE. 


43T 


described.  That  chief  modestly  pronounces  himself 
to  be  below  Odysseus  in  the  use  of  oratory. '  It  seems 
to  me  that  his  spee'ches  may  challenge  comparison 
with  all  that  we  find  in  Homer ;  and  with  all  that  the 
ebb  and  flow  of  three  thousand  years  have  added  to 
our  records  of  true  human  eloquence.  Even  here, 
Homer's  resources  are  not  exhausted.  The  decision 
of  Diomed,  the  irresolution  of  Agamemnon,  the  blunt- 
ness  of  Ajax,  are  all  admirably  marked  in  the  series 
of  speeches  allotted  to  each  respectively.  Scarcely 
anywhere  is  mediocrity  to  be  found  ;  and  perhaps  the 
greatest  example  on  record  of  a  perfectly  simple  noble- 
ness is  to  be  found  in  the  speech  of  Sarpedon  to 
Glaucos  on  the  duties  of  kings.1 

With  respect  to  the  power  of  speech,  and  the  ca- 
pacity of  being  moved  by  it,  the  performances  of  the 
Poet  are  truly  the  best  picture  of  the  age  itself.  Un- 
like great  poems,  great  speeches  cannot  be  made, 
except  in  an  age  and  place  where  they  are  understood 
and  felt.  The  work  of  the  orator  is  cast  in  the  mould 
offered  him  by  the  mind  of  his  hearers.  He  cannot 
follow  nor  frame  ideals  at  his  own  will ;  his  choice  is 
to  be  what  his  time  will  have  him,  what  it  requires  in 
order  to  be  moved  by  him,  or  not  to  be  at  all. 

If  the  power  of  oratory  proper  is  remarkable  in 
Homer,  so  likewise,  and  perhaps  yet  more,  is  the  fac- 
ulty of  what  in  England  is  called  6  debate.'  In  Homer's 
discussions,  every  speech  after  the  first  is  commonly  a 
reply.  It  belongs  not  only  to  the  subject,  but  to  the 
speech  that  went  before  ;  it  exhibits,  given  the  question 
and  the  aims  of  the  speaker,  the  exact  degree  of  as- 


i  II.  xii.  310-328. 


438 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


cent  and  descent,  of  expansion  or  contraction,  which 
the  circumstances  of  the  case,  in  the  state  up  to  which 
they  were  brought  by  the  preceding  address,  may 
require.  The  debate  in  the  Assembly  of  the  First 
Book,  and  that  in  the  Encampment  of  Achilles,1 
are,  as  oratorical  structures,  complete  and  consum- 
mate. 

A  people  cannot  act  in  its  corporate  capacity  without 
intermission  ;  and  the  King  is  the  standing  representa- 
tive of  the  community.  But  though  he  be  the  pivot  of 
its  functional  and  administrative  activity,  the  Agore, 
or  Assembly,  is  the  centre  of  its  life  and  vital  motion. 
The  greatest  ultimate  power  possessed  by  the  King  is 
that  of  exercising  an  influence  upon  his  subjects,  there 
gathered  into  one  focus,  through  the  combined  medium 
of  their  reverence  for  his  person,  and  of  his  powers  of 
persuasion.  There  is  no  decision  by  numbers  ;  the 
doctrine  of  majorities  is  an  invention,  an  expedient,  of 
a  more  advanced  social  development.  In  Olympos,  a 
minority  of  influential  gods  carry  the  day  against  the 
majority,  and  against  their  head,  in  the  great  matter 
of  the  Trojan  war. 

The  interference  of  Thersites  in  the  Debate  of  the 
Second  Iliad,  and  his  attempt  to  bring  the  Assembly 
back  to  the  impulse  of  returning  home,  were  followed 
by  sharp  corporal  chastisement,  and  by  the  menace  of 
the  last  degree  of  personal  disgrace.  But  the  very 
attempt  to  interfere  by  suggesting  such  audacious  pro- 
posals, and  these  from  a  person  so  contemptible,  may 
perhaps  be  taken  as  an  indication  that  freedom  of 
debate  generally  prevailed. 


II.  ix.  225-655. 


POLITY  OF  THE  HEROIC  AGE. 


439 


In  one  of  the  scenes  represented  on  the  Shield  of 
Achilles,  new  evidence  is  afforded  us,  that  the  people 
took  a  real  part  in  the  conduct  of  affairs.  An  As- 
sembly is  sitting.  A  criminal  suit  is  in  progress.  The 
parties  plead  on  either  side,  and  challenge  a  decision ; 
and  the  people,  taking  part  some  one  way  and  some 
the  other,  encourage  them  by  cheering.  The  heralds 
keep  order,  and  stay  the  interruptions  when  the  time 
arrives  for  the  judges  to  speak.1  This  applause  of 
itself  asserts  the  recognized  interest  and  participation 
of  the  people ;  for  it  contributes  both  to  the  decision, 
and  to  the  spirit  and  efficacy  of  the  means  of  per- 
suasion, by  which  that  decision  is  to  be  influenced. 
Not  only  so  ;  but  it  seems  to  have  been  by  popular 
vote  that  the  two  talents  were  to  be  awarded,  which 
lay  on  the  floor,  and  were  to  be  given  to  the  Elder  who 
might  pronounce  the  soundest  judgment.2  Finally, 
in  the  Assembly  of  the  Seventh  Iliad,  Idaios  arrives 
from  Troy  with  an  offer  to  restore  the  stolen  property, 
but  not  Helen  herself.  Diomed  repudiates  it,  and  his 
opinion  is  echoed  back  in  the  cheers  of  the  army. 
Agamemnon  then  addresses  himself  to  the  herald, 
'  Idaios,  you  hear  the  sense  of  the  Achaians,  how  they 
answer  you ;  and  I  think  with  them.'  Thus  the  ac- 
clamation was  also  the  vote.3 

That  which  we  do  not  find  in  Homer  is  the  submis- 
sion of  the  minority  to  the  majority  in  any  public  or 
deliberative  meeting.  This  without  doubt  is  an  expe- 
dient of  much  later  date.  But  where  difference  of 
opinion  prevails,  the  Assembly  breaks  into  opposing 
factions.    So  it  was  in  the  drunken  Assembly  men- 

i  II.  xviii.  502.    Cf.  ii.  211.        2  n.  xviii.  508.         3  II.  vii.  381. 


440 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


tioned  in  the  Odyssey  ; 1  and  the  minority  which  then 
set  sail  was  afterwards  again  divided.2  In  like  manner, 
of  the  Ithacan  Assembly  in  the  Twenty-fourth  Odyssey, 
the  majority  determined  on  neutrality,  but  the  minority 
took  arms.  And,  throughout  the  Voyages,  we  see  how 
freely  the  crews  of  Odysseus  both  spoke  and  acted, 
when  they  thought  fit,  in  opposition  to  his  views. 
These  illustrations  might  be  yet  further  extended. 

The  truth  is,  that  everywhere  among  the  Greeks  of 
Homer  we  find  the  signs  of  an  intense  corporate  or 
public  life,  subsisting,  and  working  side  by  side,  with 
that  of  the  individual.  Of  this  corporate  life,  the 
Agore  is  the  proper  organ.  If  a  man  is  to  be  described 
as  great,  he  is  always  great,  in  debate  and  on  the  field : 
if  as  insignificant,  then  he  is  of  no  account  either  in 
battle  or  in  council.  The  two  grand  forms  of  common 
and  public  action  are  taken  for  the  tests  of  the  indi- 
vidual man. 

When  Homer  wishes  to  describe  the  Kuklopes  as 
living  in  a  state  of  barbarism,  he  says,  not  that  they 
have  no  kings,  or  no  towns,  or  no  army,  but  that  they 
have  no  Assemblies,  and  no  administration  of  justice.3 
The  source  of  life  lay  in  the  community,  and  the  com- 
munity met  in  the  AgorS.  So  deeply  imbedded  is  this 
sentiment  in  the  mind  of  the  Poet,  that  it  seems  as  if 
he  could  not  conceive  an  assemblage  of  persons  having 
any  kind  of  common  function,  without  their  having,  so 
to  speak,  a  common  soul  too  in  respect  of  it. 

Of  this  common  soul,  the  organ,  in  Homer,  is  the 
Tis  or  'Somebody:'  by  no  means  one  of  the  least 
remarkable,  though  he  has  been  perhaps  the  least  re- 


1  Od.  iii.  139. 


2  Od.  iii.  162. 


3  Od.  ix.  112. 


POLITY  OF  THE  HEROIC  AGE.  441 

garded,  among  the  personages  of  the  Poems.  The  Tis 
of  Homer  seems  to  be  what  in  England  we  now  call 
Public  Opinion :  the  immediate  impression  created  in 
the  general  mind  by  public  affairs,  or  by  the  conduct 
of  the  chiefs.  We  constantly  come  upon  occasions, 
when  the  Poet  has  to  tell  us  what  was  the  prevailing 
sentiment  of  the  Greek  army.  He  might  have  done 
this  didactically,  or  by  way  of  narrative.  He  has 
adopted  a  method  more  poetical  and  less  obtrusive. 
He  proceeds  dramatically,  through  the  medium  of  a 
person  and  of  a  formula, 4  Hereupon,  thus  spoke  some- 
body:' 

6de  6s  Tig  elireotcev. 

This  would  be  sufficiently  noteworthy  if  we  found  it 
only  among  the  Greeks  in  war,  and  again  in  peace  : 
for,  when  Odysseus  causes  music  and  dancing  in  his 
palace,  with  a  view  to  producing  an  impression  on  the 
people  of  the  town  of  Ithaca,  it  is  Tis  who  tells  what 
it  was.1  But  it  is  not  only  in  a  normal  state  of  things 
among  his  own  people,  that  Tis  is  found.  When 
Greeks  and  Trojans  meet  for  the  purpose  of  the  Pact, 
there  is  a  Tis  for  the  Trojans  also.2  The  Suitors, 
again,  are  a  body  of  dissolute  and  selfish  youths,  and 
are  competitors  with  each  other  for  a  prize  which  but 
one  among  them  can  enjoy.  Yet  in  some  sense  they 
are  bound  together  by  a  common  interest  of  iniquity ; 
and,  although  we  are  introduced  to  many  of  them  in- 
dividually by  their  speeches,  yet  they  too  have  a  Tis 3 
who  expresses  their  general  sentiment  on  occurrences 
as  they  pass.  Too  broad  to  be  confined  to  Greece,  this 


i  Od.  xxiii.  148-152. 


2  II.  iii.  319. 


3  Od.  ii.  324. 


442 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


conception  is  not  even  restricted  to  mankind  :  and  Tis 
appears  in  Olympos,  expressing  the  common  or  average 
sentiment  of  the  assembled  gods.1 

This  remarkable  and  characteristic  creation  remains, 
I  believe,  the  exclusive  property  of  Homer.  But  per- 
haps we  may  discern  in  the  Homeric  Tis  the  primary 
ancestor  of  the  famous  Greek  Chorus.  Like  Tis,  the 
Greek  Chorus  is  severed  from  all  mere  individuality, 
and  expresses  the  generalized  sentiment  of  the  body  or 
people  to  which  it  belongs,  in  the  highest  and  best 
sense  which  their  prevailing  standard  will  allow. 

Except  in  the  mouth  of  the  scoundrel  Thersites, 
nothing  like  political  discontent  appears  in  any  part 
of  the  Poems  of  Homer.  The  popular  sentiment  ad- 
verse to  Odysseus  on  his  return  to  Ithaca  is  probably 
a  personal  resentment,  not  only  for  the  death  of  the 
Suitors,  but  for  all  the  crews  of  his  good  ships  lost  in 
the  War  and  on  the  Voyage.  There  is  no  invidious 
distinction  between  class  and  class,  nor  any  of  the 
social  feuds  which  might  be  its  result.  No  recognized 
portion  of  the  community  is  imagined  to  require  re- 
pression or  restraint  from  the  government.  The  King, 
or  Chief,  is  uplifted  to  set  a  high  example,  to  lead  the 
common  counsels  to  common  ends,  to  conduct  the 
public  and  common,  intercourse  with  heaven,  to  decide 
the  strifes  of  private  persons,  which  might  bring 
danger  to  the  common  weal,  and  to  defend  the  borders 
of  the  common  territory  from  invasion. 

For  the  chief  component  parts  of  Greek  society,  we 
have  first  the  King  and  his  family.  Round  him  are 
his  Kerukes,  Serjeants  or  heralds,  his  only  executive 


i  Od.  viii.  328. 


POLITY  OF  THE  HEROIC  AGE. 


443 


government:  his  Bard,  ever  giving  delight  and  receiv- 
ing respect :  his  Seniors,  who  assist  in  council,  and 
in  judgment:  his  Nobles,  the  only  wealthy  of  the 
period.  From  them  the  Prince  or  King  seems  to  be 
in  general  pretty  broadly  distinguished  ;  for  the  rule 
is  that  the  legitimate  son,  the  heir-apparent,  contracts 
marriage  beyond  his  own  borders.  But  Megapenthes, 
the  serf-born  son  of  Menelaos,  marries  in  Sparta  it- 
self.1 

Under  the  name  of  demioergoi,2  which  includes 
both  the  professional  men  and  the  skilled  laborers  of 
the  community,  Homer  includes  the  prophet,  the 
physician  or  wound-healer,  the  carpenter  or  wright, 
and  the  Bard.3  The  fact  that  the  worker  in  metals  is 
not  included,  tends  to  show,  in  accordance  with  all 
the  other  evidence  of  the  Homeric  text,  that  this 
kind  of  labor  had  not  attained  to  any  great  degree 
of  development  in  Greece. 

That  the  pursuits  of  manual  labor  were  not  below 
the  notice  even  of  princes,  we  find  from  the  case  not 
only  of  Odysseus,  but  of  Paris,4  who  joined  in  the 
building  of  his  own  palace  ;  and  of  Lucaon,  who  was 
cutting  young  wood  for  his  chariot,  when,  for  the  first 
time,  he  fell  into  the  hands  of  Achilles.5  Bards,  heralds, 
and  seers,  are  all  persons  of  general  influence  and 
importance.6  We  hear  of  merchants  only  within  the 
Phoenician  circle  :  as  Mentes  of  the  Taphians,  and  again 
from  the  mouth  of  Eurualos  in  Scherie.7  We  have  also 


i  Od.  iv.  5,  10,  797  ;  xi.  85  ;  et  alibi.  *  Od.  xvii.  383. 

3  In  another  place  he  adds  the  herald,  Od.  xix.  135. 

4  II.  vi.  314.  5  II.  xxi.  35. 

6  Od.  iii.  267  ;  xvii.  263 ;  xxiv.  439.         7  Od.  i.  183  ;  viii.  161. 


444 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


in  Scherie  aisumnetai,  or  masters  of  the  ceremonies, 
who  make  the  arrangements  needful  for  the  dance.1 

There  are  inferior  professions  of  partially  skilled 
hand-laborers  ;  among  whom  it  is  interesting  to  notice 
the  drain-digger ;  the  fisherman,  named  only  in  Ithaca ; 2 
the  charioteer,  and  the  woodman,  for  both  of  whom, 
says  the  Poet,  as  well  as  for  the  pilot,  skill  avails  far 
more  than  force.3 

But  the  persons  named  in  connection  with  special 
employments  are  rather  classes,  distinguished  from  the 
general  body  of  the  community,  than  the  parts  which 
make  up  the  aggregate.  They  seem  all  to  be  picked 
men.  Considering  on  the  one  hand  the  position  of  the 
masses  in  the  Assemblies,  and  the  appeals  there  made 
to  them,  on  the  other,  the  absence,  in  both  the  Poems, 
of  anything  like  an  extended  personal  following  attached 
to  the  lyings  or  chiefs,  I  come  slowly  to  the  conclusion, 
as  most  agreeable  to  the  evidence,  which  is  far  from 
demonstrative,  that  the  bulk  of  the  community  were 
probably  small  or  peasant  proprietors,  tilling  their  own 
lands.  The  mode  of  their  equipment  as  heavy,  not 
light,  armed  soldiers,  tends  to  sustain  this  conclusion. 
Even  the  sons  of  the  slave  D olios  appear  to  put  on  the 
ordinary  armor.4  We  have  then  probably  before  us, 
in  the  composition  of  .early  Greek  society,  that  mixture 
and  gradation  of  fortunes,  which  so  much  contribute  to 
the  unity  and  strength  of  a  community :  the  eminent 
men  leading  because  they  were  the  best,  and  the  mass 
content  to  follow  them  for  the  same  good  reason. 

The  representation  of  the  state  of  society  and  of 


i  Od.  viii.  258. 
3  II.  xxiii.  315-318. 


2  Od.  xxiv.  419. 
4  Od.  xxiv.  496. 


POLITY  OF  THE  HEROIC  AGE. 


445 


opinion  in  Ithaca,  contained  in  the  Odyssey,  is  ex- 
tremely curious.  The  term  Baailsvg,  so  carefully  limited 
in  the  Iliad,  is  here  extended  to  the  chief  nobles ;  as 
it  is  in  Scherie  to  the  twelve  principal  persons  who 
were  counsellors  of  Alkinoos :  and,  along  with  it  the 
epithet  AiorQ^y\q  undergoes  a  similar  enlargement. 
Since  Homer  drew  from  hearsay  his  materials  for  treat- 
ing of  Scherie,  we  cannot  reason  confidently  upon  its 
institutions  in  their  minute  detail.  But,  when  he 
speaks  of  Greek  society,  the  case  is  different.  And, 
in  effect,  what  the  Poet  shows  us  in  the  dominions  of 
Odysseus  is  a  great  political  change,  brought  about  by 
the  absence,  through  a  prolonged  period,  of  a  powerful 
influence  much  more  personal  than  traditional.  King- 
ship subsisted  at  that  period  in  virtue  of  the  strong 
mind  and  strong  hand  of  the  King.  Only  the  aizeos, 
the  man  within  the  flower  of  his  manhood,  was  equal 
to  it.  Laertes  from  his  age,  Telemachos  from  his 
youth,  Penelope  as  a  woman,  and  thus  open  to  the  ac- 
cess of  suitors,  were  unequal  to  the  charge.  In  the 
absence,  then,  of  the  true  King,  each  minor  personage 
of  the  order  of  nobles  apparently  set  up  as  king.  More- 
over local  attachment  prevailed  over  central  influences  ; 
and  the  people,  at  least  of  the  town,  were  with  the  op- 
ponents of  Odysseus.  Except  on  his  own  estate,  the 
influence  of  his  family,  after  a  course  of  years,  was 
gone.  Telemachos  can  only  say  that  by  no  means  are 
the  whole  of  the  demos1  or  people  averse  to  him.  The 
Suitors,  shut  within  the  palace  for  the  terrible  assault 
of  Odysseus,  feel  that,  if  they  could  but  get  out  into 
the  town,  so  as  to  give  the  alarm,  they  should  be  safe. 


i  Od.  xvi.  114. 


446  JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 

After  the  fact,  Odysseus  proposes  by  a  stratagem  to 
arrest  any  rumor  of  the  slaughter.1  On  finding  Laertes, 
he  declares,  '  we  have  no  time  to  lose.' 2  He  had 
quitted  the  town  at  once,  evidently  as  having  no  hope 
there.  A  civil  war  is  the  sequel  to  the  return  of  the 
legitimate  Sovereign,  who  has  only  to  rely,  after  the 
favor  of  the  gods  and  his  own  powerful  mind,  upon  a 
mere  handful  of  dependants.  Odysseus  calls  the  Suit- 
ors, whom  he  had  destroyed,  the  stay  or  strength 3  of 
the  community ;  and  the  Shade  of  Agamemnon  recog- 
nizes them  as  the  flower  of  men.4  Doubtless  their 
party  was  strengthened  by  their  King's  having  lost  all 
his  comrades,  and  by  the  biting  appeal5  they  were  thus 
enabled  to  make  to  the  relatives  of  the  dead.  His 
sources  of  aid  seem  to  have  lain  in  Pulos  and  in  Elis.6 
Of  the  Ithacan  Assembly,  near  half 7  went  to  take  arms 
against  Odysseus  ;  while  the  others  stood  neuter.  The 
great  Chief  had  on  the  moment  but  twelve  men  in  all  to 
resist  them :  three  of  his  family,  nine  serfs. 

A  flood  of  light  is  thrown,  from  this  picture  in 
miniature,  upon  the  structure  of  society,  and  the  nature 
of  political  power  among  the  Hellenes  of  the  heroic,  or 
the  immediately  post-heroic,  age. 

Laws  can  hardly  exist  without  writing ;  and,  in  the 
age  of  Homer,  writing,  or  what  stood  in  its  place,  was 
at  most  no  more  than  the  secret  of  a  few  families  of 
Phoenician  extraction.  It  was  certainly  unavailable 
for  any  purpose  of  general  interest.  A  Greek  word  for 
4  law '  is  not  to  be  found  in  Homer.  With  him,  vopog 
means  a  tract  of  pasture.8    We  find  however  («)  dixij 

i  Od.  xxiii.  137-140.         2  Od.  xxiv.  324. 
4  Od.  xxiv.  106-108 ;  cf.  429. 
6  Od.  xxiv.  430,  436.         1  Od.  xxiv.  463. 


3  Od.  xxiii.  121. 
5  Od.  xxiv.  428. 
8  Od.  ix.  217. 


POLITY  OP  THE  HEROIC  AGE. 


447 


and  dkou,  (6)  depict  eg.  The  latter  appear  to  be  the 
principles  of  right ;  the  former,  those  principles  of  right 
put  into  action  by  judicial  proceedings,  when  they  have 
become  matter  of  contention;  the  two1  are  clearly 
enough  to  be  distinguished. 

In  the  absence  of  law,  strictly  so  called,  the  Oath  was 
of  peculiar  importance.  It  was  so  solemn,  that  the  only 
special  offence,  expressly  marked  out  for  punishment  in 
the  other  world,  is  the  offence  of  perjury.2  And  it  was 
so  effectual,  as  not  only  to  bind  man  to  man,  but  deity . 
to  deity.3  The  river  Styx  was  the  great  Oath  of  the 
gods,4  evidently  implying  their  liability,  not  indeed  to 
death,  but  to  deposition  ;  and  the  possibility  that  they 
might  exchange  bright  Olympos,  as  the  older  dynasties 
of  Nature-Powers  had  exchanged  it,  for  the  dreary 
Underworld.  The  Trojans  break  faith  and  oath  in 
the  Fourth  Iliad :  the  Greeks  never.  Yet  Autolucos, 
the  father  of  Penelope,  had  received  from  Hermes5  the 
gifts  of  pilfering  and  perjury ;  and  thus  moral  corrup- 
tion had  begun  to  distil  from  depraved  belief. 

The  xeinos  or  xenos,  in  the  largest  sense,  com- 
prehends and  brings  together  three  very  different 
classes. 

1.  The  itinerating  beggar,6  ptochos  pandemios, 
who,  in  days  when  money  did  not  exist  as  a  circulating 
medium,  sought  relief  in  the  form  of  hospitality,  relief 
in  kind ;  and  in  some  sense  paid  for  it  by  carrying 
news.7 

2.  The  Suppliant  (h iket  e  s),  who  may  be  of  station 
high  or  low,  but  who  appears  with  a  suit  for  shelter, 


l  Od.  ix.  215. 

3  II.  xiv.  278 ;  xv.  36-46. 

5  Od.  xix.  396.  6  Od.  xviii.  1. 


2  II.  iii.  279. 
4  II.  xv.  37. 
7  Od.  xviii.  7. 


448 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


subsistence,  or  other  aid,  under  the  pressure  of  some 
peculiar  necessity  or  calamity. 

3.  The  xeinos  proper  ;  the  guest,  whose  need  arises 
simply  out  of  the  fact  that,  being  away  from  home,  he 
has  not  his  resources  at  hand,  and  therefore  seeks  to 
have  them  supplied  in  the  home  of  another. 

Slavery  is  not  a  prominent  feature  of  Greek  society 
in  the  Homeric  age.  It  would  appear  to  have  been 
nearly  or  perhaps  wholly  confined  to  the  establish- 
ments, in-door  and  out-door,  of  the  chiefs.  The  lan- 
guage of  Achilles  in  the  Underworld,  4  rather  would  I 
serve  for  hire  even  with  a  poor  employer,'  seems  to 
imply  that  hire  was  the  ordinary  basis  of  service.  If 
Odysseus  had  had  very  numerous  slaves,  without  doubt 
he  and  Telemachos  would  have  been  represented  in 
the  Odyssey  as  having  raised  and  armed  them  against 
the  party  of  the  Suitors  ;  which  they  did  with  the  mere 
handful  at  their  command.  The  slaves  appear  to  have 
been  few,  in  comparison  with  the  number  of  the  com- 
munity. The  demos  or  free  people,  who  constituted 
the  Assemblies,  seem  also  to  have  composed  the  mass 
of  the  population  of  cultivators. 

The  two  sources  named  for  supplying  slaves  are 

1.  War; 

2.  Kidnapping. 

In  all  cases  this  kidnapping  is  of  single  individuals. 
We  hear  of  it  as  practised  by  the  Phoenicians,  the  Ta- 
phians  (a  branch  of  the  Phoenicians),  and  the  Thes- 
protians.  Not  by  the  Greeks  ;  though  Melanthios,  the 
goatherd  in  the  Odyssey,  without  doubt  a  serf,  as  he 
was  the  son  of  a  serf,1  among  his  other  insolences, 
threatens  to  carry  away  Eumaios,  and  sell  him.2 

i  Od.  xvii.  212 ;  iv.  736-  2  Qd.  xvii.  249. 


POLITY  OF  THE  HEROIC  AGE. 


449 


We  do  not  hear  of  any  physical  want  or  suffering  in 
connection  with  the  condition  of  slaves  ;  nor  ought  we 
to  interpret  too  rigidly  the  prophecy  of  Hector  concern- 
ing Andromache,  as  proving  that  they  were  treated 
with  rudeness.1  But  Homer  saw  both  the  enfeebling 
and  the  depressing  effect,  the  moral  blight,  of  even  a 
mild  slavery,  and  has  recorded  it  in  golden  words. 
With  Homer,  a  slave  is  but  one  half  of  a  man.2 

Slaves,  from  the  circumstances  of  the  case,  were 
often  of  birth  and  manners  not  unequal  to  those  of 
their  masters.  Eumaios  was  the  son  of  the  ruler  of  his 
country  ;  and  was  brought  up  together  with  Ctimen£, 
the  daughter  of  Laertes.3 

The  slavery  of  Homer's  time  is  a  mitigated  slavery. 
It  nowhere  appears  in  association  with  wanton  cruelty 
or  oppression.  The  slave  may  be  familiar  with  his 
master :  Odysseus,  on  the  Return,  is  kissed  by  his 
slaves.  The  slave  may  acquire  property,  may  be  the 
master  of  other  slaves,  as  Eumaios  was  of  Mesaulios;4 
finally,  he  is  trusted  with  arms.  A  good  master  is  ex- 
pected to  supply  his  slave  with  a  wife. 

The  absence  of  the  chiefs  and  army  from  Greece  for 
a  lengthened  period,  without  any  danger  arising  from 
this  source,  of  itself  appears  to  prove,  that  slaves  must 
have  constituted  an  element  numerically  insignificant 
in  that  country.  Another  reason  for  this  belief  is  to 
be  found  in  the  fact,  that  no  distinction  appears  to  have 
been  drawn,  as  in  after  times,  of  a  nature  to  make 
laborious  manual  employments  dishonorable.  As  it 
was  part  of  the  prized  accomplishments  of  a  King  like 

1  II.  vi.  454-463.  ^Comp.  II.  xxii.  484-507 ;  where  not  slavery,  but 
orphanhood,  is  supposed.  2  Od.  xvii.  323. 

3  Od.  xv.  413,  363.  *  Od.  xiv.  449. 

29 


450 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


Odysseus  to  be  able  to  drive  the  plough,  we  may  be 
almost  sure  that  field-labor  could  not  have  been,  either 
universally  or  generally,  intrusted  to  the  hands  of 
slaves. 

The  general  picture  presented  to  us  is,  that  of  free 
self-governing  agricultural  societies  under  mild  aristo- ' 
cratic  rule,  the  mass  living  in  a  self-sufficing  independ- 
ence ;  and  only  a  comparative  handful,  it  is  probable, 
dependent  in  any  degree,  however  small,  on  the  assist- 
ance of  slaves  for  the  management  of  their  households 
and  estates.  At  the  same  time,  as  between  the  serf 
and  the  thes  or  laborer  for  hire,  it  is  material  to 
remember  that,  in  the  Homeric  period,  wages  could 
only  be  paid  in  kind,  as  there  was  no  currency  avail- 
able. This  being  so,  the  hired  freeman,  if  without 
other  resource,  might  perhaps,  as  to  material  comforts, 
be  in  no  better  position  than  the  bondman. 

We  have  no  trace  of  slavery  in  the  Greek  army,  nor 
of  any  large  or  numerous  class  of  slaves  anywhere. 
The  probable  inference  again,  is,  that  slaves  consti- 
tuted but  a  limited  proportion  of  the  community. 

It  is  possible  that  gold  and  silver  may  to  a  very 
trifling  extent  have  been  used  as  a  common  measure 
of  commodities,  or  medium  of  exchange.  For  gold  is 
frequently  mentioned  as  a  constituent  part  of  stored 
wealth  ;  and  we  can  hardly  suppose  that  it  was  so 
stored  simply  for  use  in  the  manufacture  of  commodities 
for  the  owners  by  gilt  plating  or  otherwise.  But,  on 
the  other  hand,  other  commodities  are  not  valued  in 
gold  or  in  silver.  Only  the  payment  of  the  Judge's 
fee,  or  prize,  in  gold,  on  the  Shield  of  Achilles, 
approaches  to  a  case  of  the  use  of  gold  money.  It 
is  like  the  s  em  at  a  or  signs  on  the  tablets  of  Proitos, 


POLITY  OP  THE  HEROIC  AGE. 


451 


the  germ  of  a  practice  rather  than  the  practice 
itself. 

The  arms  of  Glaucos  and  of  Diomed,  the  tripod 
which  is  the  first  prize  for  wrestlers  in  the  Games,  and 
the  skilled  captive  woman  who  was  the  second,  are  all 
valued  or  priced  in  oxen ; 1  and  the  ox  is  the  commo- 
dity which  represents  in  Homer  what  we  now  term  the 
measure  of  value,  as  far  as  it  can  be  said  to  be  repre- 
sented at  all.  The  captive  Lucaon  fetches  for  Achilles 
the  value  of  a  hundred  oxen:2  Eurucleia  is  sold  to 
Laertes  for  the  value  of  twenty.3  The  Suitors  promise 
to  Odysseus  the  value  of  a  hundred  oxen  each,  as  ran- 
som.4 The  most  detailed  account  in  the  Poems  of  a 
commercial  transaction  is  in  the  Seventh  Iliad,  where 
Euneos  gives  wine  in  exchange  for  slaves,  hides,  cop- 
per, iron,  and  oxen.  The  four  first-named  commodities 
he  might  well  carry  away  from  a  camp  for  sale  else- 
where. As  to  slaves,  for  example,  the  skilled  woman 
of  the  Iliad  is  worth  only  four  oxen  :  Eurucleia  in  Ithaca 
worth  twenty.  They  represent  respectively  the  prices 
of -an  exporting  market  with  a  glut,  and  of  a  market  of 
import  with  a  demand  from  over  sea  scantily  supplied. 
The  oxen  which  Euneos  took,  he  possibly  took  from 
those  who  were  overstocked,  and  sold  again  on  the  spot 
to  such  as  chanced  to  want  them.5 

Tims  we  can  understand  why  iEschylus  represents 
the  ox  as  the  earliest  sign  impressed  on  money.6 

Among  the  leading  political  ideas  exhibited  in  the 
Homeric  Poems  will  be  found  the  following :  — 

Authority  to  rule  is  derived  from  heaven,  and  the 


i  II.  xxiii.  702-705. 
4  Od.  xxii.  57-59. 


2  II.  xxi.  79. 

5  II.  vii.  467-475. 


3  Od.  i.  431. 
6  Agam.  37. 


452 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


abuse  of  this  authority,  the  corruption  and  the  crimes 
of  rulers,  are  marked  by  divine  judgments  on  a  land. 

Equality  is  not  dreamt  of;  but  liberty  is  highly 
prized. 

A  strong  sense  of  responsibility  weighs  upon  the 
mind  of  any  ruler  not  utterly  corrupt. 

The  possessions  and  honors  of  kings  are  not  un- 
conditional, but  are  held  by  them  in  trust  for  the 
performance  of  public  duties ;  among  these,  in  order 
that  they  may  set  an  example  to  the  people  in  time 
of  danger. 

The  gravest  matters  affecting  the  public  interest  are 
debated  and  decided  in  the  Assemblies  of  the  people. 

Discussion  is  conducted  in  general  by  persons  en- 
joying weight  from  their  age,  station,  birth,  or  ability ; 
in  a  word,  by  the  class  possessed  of  leisure  and  social 
influence ;  but  the  deliberation  and  assent  of  the  As- 
semblies are  free. 

A  public  opinion  readily  forms  and  freely  circulates 
among  the  people,  approving  or  condemning  the  acts 
of  those  in  authority. 

Publicity  attends  all  judicial  and  deliberative  pro- 
ceedings ;  but  a  council  of  chiefs  often  privately  pre- 
pares matter  for  the  Assembly. 

The  will  of  the  Assembly  takes  effect  in  the  Act  of 
the  Executive.1 

Speech  is  the  great  accomplishment  of  man ;  and  is 
the  main  instrument  of  government  in  peace,  as  the 
sword  is  in  war.  These  two  powers,  representing 
moral  and  martial  force  respectively,  stand  in  a  posi- 
tion of  honor  peculiar  to  themselves. 


i  Od.  iii.  99. 


POLITY  OF  THE  HEROIC  AGE. 


453 


These  political  ideas  are  traceable  in  the  Olympian, 
as  well  as  in  the  human,  society ;  but  their  application 
and  development  are  less  satisfactory  in  that  upper 
region. 

The  bond  that  held  Greek  society  together  in  the 
Homeric  time,  and  that  secured  the  basis  on  which  it 
was  to  be  organized  and  developed,  was  fivefold ;  and 
the  strands  of  this  well-knit  rope  are  represented  re- 
spectively by  single  words. 

1.  0e6g,  the  Deity,  and  the  worship  of  Immortal  and 

unseen  Beings  in  all  its  various  forms. 

2.  08[iig,  the  principle  of  social  right  and  duty,  chiefly  as 

between  neighbors  and  fellow-citizens. 

3.  "Ogxog,  the  ultimate  sanction  of  good  faith. 

4.  Eeivog,  representing  the  basis  of  kindly  and  friendly  re- 

lation, and  of  good  offices  among  men,  beyond  the 
limits  of  polity  and  of  class. 

5.  rd\xog,  the'great  institution  of  marriage,  determining  the 

relation  between  the  two  varieties  of  human  kind  ; 
constituting  the  family,  and  providing  for  the  contin- 
uance of  the  species. 

The  one  great  creative  and  formative  idea  which 
runs  through  the  whole  of  these  is  Reverence,  that 
powerful  principle,  the  counter-agent  to  all  meanness 
and  selfishness,  which  obliges  a  man  to  have  regard  to 
some  law  or  standard  above  that  of  force,  and  extrinsic 
to  his  own  will,  his  own  passions,  or  his  own  pro- 
pensities. 

The  five  given  above  are  the  main  channels  into 
which  the  stream  is  distributed.  But  they  have  many 
subdivisions  or  specific  forms,  such  as  — 

Reverence  for  Parents ; 
Reverence  for  Kings ; 


454 


JUYENTUS  MUNDI. 


Reverence  for  the  old  ; 

Reverence  for  beauty ;  of  which  perhaps  the  very 
noblest  example  ever  given  is  the  manner  in  which 
Odysseus  is  struck  by  Nausicaa.  One  much  lower, 
and  more  Asiatic,  is  that  of  the  Trojan  dr^wysQOVTeg, 
or  Elders,  when  Helen  goes  forth  to  the  Wall ; 1 

Reverence  for  the  opinion  of  fellow-men ; 2 

Reverence  for  the  dead ; 

Reverence  for  the  weak  and  poor. 

These  emotions  and  habits  of  reverence  were  to  the 
Greek  mind  and  life  what  the  dykes  in  Holland  are 
to  the  surface  of  the  country  ;  shutting  off  passions 
as  the  angry  sea,  and  securing  a  broad  open  surface 
for  the  growth  of  every  tender  and  genial  product  of 
the  soil. 


i  Od.  vi.  149  seqq.    II.  iii.  154-158. 


2  Ii.  ix.  459-461. 


CHAPTER  XII. 


Resemblances  and  Differences  between  the  Greeks  and 
the  Trojans. 

This  subject,  which  has  been  treated  with  some 
detail  in  the  '  Studies  on  Homer/ 1  will  now  be  touched 
on  only  so  far  as  to  present  its  main  heads. 

Sufficient  reason  has  perhaps  been  given  for  the 
belief  that  there  is  a  double  ethnical  relation  between 
the  inhabitants  of  Troas  and  of  Greece.  The  common 
soldiery  appear  to  correspond,  without  any  sensible  in- 
feriority of  the  Trojans,  who,  however,  appear  to  have 
been  in  greater  proportion  lightly  armed  ;  and  all  that 
we  learn  of  the  people  tends  to  associate  them,  in 
blood  and  language,  with  what  we  may  largely  call  the 
Pelasgian  and  more  archaic  element  in  Greece.  The 
ruling  houses,  again,  are  connected  in  the  bonds  of 
hospitality,  as  appears  from  the  visit  of  Paris  to  Mene- 
laos.  The  son  of  Anchises  resided  in  Greece.2  Diomed 
has  the  xenial  relation  with  ,  the  Lycian  Glaucos.  Re- 
lations to  the  line  of  the  personage  termed  Aiolos,  so 
powerful  in  Greece,  are  visible  in  the  Dardanian  royal 
family. 


i  Vol.  iii.    Ilios,  pp.  145-247. 


2  II.  xxiii.  296. 


456 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


When  we  turn  to  language,  a  near  relation,  perhaps 
that  of  substantial  identity,  seems  probable.  A  Greek 
name,  Astuanax,  lord  of  the  city,  is  expressly  stated 
to  have  been  given  by  the  Trojans  to  the  son  of  Hector. 
The  Trojan  army,  indeed,  is  stated  to  have  spoken 
various  tongues ;  but  this  is  placed  in  immediate  con- 
nection with  the  presence  of  the  Epicouroi  or  al- 
lies,1 one  race  of  whom,  the  Carians,  are  called  speakers 
of  a  barbarous,  meaning  probably  a  wholly  foreign, 
language. 

In  the  matter  of  religion  there  is  little,  if  any,  dif- 
ference between  the  mere  names  of  such  gods  as  are 
brought  prominently  forward.  As  the  great  contro- 
versy was  to  be  fought  out  in  Olympos,  no  less  than  on 
earth,  Homer  was  in  a  manner  compelled  to  find  a 
meeting-point  for  the  mythologies  of  the  respective 
parties.  We  find  mentioned  expressly  the  worship  in 
Troas  of  Zeus,  Athen£,  Apollo,  and  Hephaistos.  Leto 
and  Artemis  attend  in  the  temple  of  Apollo  on  Per- 
gamos.  Ares  must  have  been  known  as  a  god  to  those, 
for  whom  he  fights.  Aphrodite  was  eminently  Trojan,  as 
we  see  from  her  favor  for  Paris;  her  passion  for 
Anchises ;  her  marriage-gift  to  Andromache ;  her 
ministerial  charge  over  the  body  of  Hector  ; 2  and 
from  the  biting  taunts  of  Pallas,  of  Helen,  and  of 
Diomed.3  Hermes  is  said  to  give  increase  to  the  flocks 
of  Phorbas  ; 4  yet  does  not  appear  to  be  recognized  as 
a  known  Trojan  deity  by  Priam,  when  he  gives  his 
name,  and  specifies  in  addition  that  he  is  an  immortal 
god.5    Poseidon  had  a  deadly  quarrel  with  Troy,  but 


i  II.  ii.  803-806. 

3  II.  iii.  400-402 ;  v.  348-351,  420-425. 
5  II.  xxiv.  461. 


2  II.  xxiii.  184-187. 
4  II.  xiv.  490. 


THE  GREEKS  AND  THE  TROJANS. 


457 


was  in  close  and  friendly  relations  with  the  Dardanian 
branch.1  Here  is  named  as  the  wife  of  Zeus,  and  as 
slighted  in  the  Judgment  of  Paris.2 

Now,  a  great  River  —  not  the  humanized  spirit  of  a 
River,  but  the  River  itself — the  Scamandros,  or  Xan- 
thos,  of  the  Ilian  plain,  appears  in  the  Theomachy,  and 
fights  on  the  side  of  Troy  against  Hephaistos.  Here 
is  an  indication,  which  cannot  be  mistaken,  that  a 
Nature-worship,  alien  to  the  Olympian  system,  pre- 
vailed in  Troas.  We  have  other  signs  of  this  great 
and,  probably,  fundamental  distinction  of  the  two 
religions.  While  Her£  is  so  faintly  sketched,  her 
Pelasgian  prototype,  Gaia,  is  an  object  of  ordinary 
worship  in  Troas,  although  in  Greece  she  is  banished 
to  the  Underworld.  And  the  Sun  (Helios)  of  the 
Iliad  sympathizes  with  the  Trojans,  while  the  Apollo 
of  the  First  Book  shows  signs  of  affinity  with  that 
luminary,  that  are  rooted  perhaps  in  his  name  P hoi- 
bos,  but  that  are  not  allowed  any  place  or  recognition 
in  the  Olympian  scheme.  Of  all  single  passages,  that 
which  most  gives  the  key  to  the  distinction  is  the 
speech  of  Menelaos  before  the  Pact,3  where  he  proposes 
a  joint  act  of  religion  to  be  performed  on  behalf  of 
both  parties.  The  Greeks  are  to  offer  a  single  lamb 
to  Zeus  ;  and  the  Trojans  two,  one  of  them  to  the 
Earth,  the  other  to  the  Sun.  Eos,  the  morning,  an- 
other Nature-Power,  is  made  known  to  us  as  the 
bride  of  Tithonos,  and  may  therefore  be  set  down 
among  the  deities  of  Troy.  It  does  not  seem  clear 
that  she  was  in  any  way  impersonated  in  Greece. 

It  is  very  probable,  that  Hephaistos  and  other  dei- 

i  II.  xx.  290-292.  2  ii.  x.  329 ;  xiii.  826  ;  xxiv.  29. 

3  II.  iii.  103. 


458 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


ties  may  have  been  known  under  forms  of  tradition 
variously  modified,  in  Troas  and  in  Greece  respec- 
tively ;  and,  indeed,  in  different  portions  of  one  and 
the  same  country.  These  forms,  however  distinct  or 
discordant,  the  plan  of  Homer  required  him  in  some 
manner  to  amalgamate. 

So  much  for  abstract  belief.  As  to  the  modes  of  its 
development,  they  would  appear  to  have  been  on  the 
Trojan  side  sacerdotal,  on  the  Greek  imaginative.  In 
the  Greek  system,  besides  the  great  Olympian  deities, 
we  have  the  gods  of  the  older  dynasty,  and  of  the 
Underworld  ;  the  Giants  ;  the  Nymphs,  and  other  per- 
sonages, anthropomorphically  conceived,  and  presiding 
over  groves,  rivers,  meadows  ;  the  great  ethical  fig- 
ures of  the  Destinies  and  the  Erinues,  of  Ate  and 
the  Prayers  ;  and  a  multitude  of  purely  poetical  im- 
personations, such  as  Terror,  Rumor,  and  the  like. 
In  Troas,  we  seem  to  find  none  of  this  large  and 
varied  apparatus,  except  the  names  of  certain  Nymphs, 
who  are  mentioned  as  mothers  of  human  children.  In- 
deed, even  the  future  state  seems  to  have  been  feebly  con- 
ceived in  Troy;1  and  the  oath  of  Hector  to  Dolon2 
makes  no  allusion  to  the  penalty  of  perjury,  which, 
as  we  see,  was  incurred  by  Pandaros  without  shame 
or  hesitation.  Not  only  do  we  still  hear  of  the  illus- 
trious Shade  of  Patroclos  after  death,  but  the  passage 
of  the  souls  of  the  Suitors  from  Ithaca  is  vividly  de- 
scribed in  the  Odyssey ; 3  but  of  the  Trojans  nothing- 
is  ever  told  us  beyond  the  grave,  except  one  or  two 
repetitions  of  the  mere  formula  that  they  went  to 
Hades.    A  materializing  religion  is  not  favorable  to 


i  II.  vi.  422 ;  xxii.  482. 


2  n.  x.  329. 


3  xxiv.  1-10. 


THE  GREEKS  AND  THE  TROJANS.  459 


the  retention  of  the  belief  in  a  future  state ;  and  hu- 
man experience  seems  to  have  established  widely,  up 
to  the  present  point  of  the  history  of  the  race,  the 
connection  between  such  a  belief  and  the  repression 
of  perjury. 

But  when  we  turn  to  sacerdotal  institutions  and 
ritual  forms,  again  the  contrast  is  a  striking  one. 

The  three  subjects  of  priesthood,  temples,  and  glebes, 
seem  to  be  closely  connected ;  especially  the  first  and 
third :  for  where  there  was  an  estate,  we  may  be  pretty 
sure  that  there  was  some  official  person,  namely,  the 
priest,  to  live  upon  the  proceeds. 

Now  we  never  hear  of  a  temenos,  or  consecrated 
glebe-land,  for  any  deity,  except  four  times.  There  is 
the  temenos  of  Zeus  in  Gargaros  ; 1  of  Demeter  in 
Thessaly  ; 2  of  Aphrodite  at  Paphos  ; 3  and  of  the  River 
Spercheios  in  Thessaly.4  The  first  is  in  Troas ;  the 
third  in  Cyprus ;  the  other  two  stand  in  evident  con- 
nection with  the  old  or  Pelasgian  worship. 

Let  us  next  look  to  the  Priests  of  the  Poems.  We 
have  Chruses,  the  Priest  of  Apollo  in  Troas  ;  Maron, 
a  priest  of  the  same  deity  at  Ismaros,  among  the 
Kikones,  allies  of  Troy;  and  again  in  Troas,  Dares, 
priest  of  Hephaistos ;  Dolopion  (areter,  literally 
pray-er)  of  Scamandros  ;  Theano,  priestess  of  Athene" ; 
Onetor,  priest  of  the  Zeus  of  Ida.  But  neither  in  the 
Greek  army,  nor  in  Greece  itself,  have  we  any  mention 
of  a  priest  contemporary  with  the  Poems.  Especially 
in  the  case  of  Ithaca  this  negative  evidence  is  strong. 
I  refer  back  to  what  has  been  already  said  on  this 
subject  in  the  description  of  the  kingly  office. 


i  II.  viii.  48. 
3  Od.  viii.  362. 


2  II.  ii.  696. 
4  II.  xxiii.  148. 


460 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


Besides  the  Priests,  there  is  the  separate  order  of 
Prophets.  These  are  fully  known  in  Greece  under 
different  names,  and  are  recognized  as  one  of  the  reg- 
ular standing  professions  in  a  community  at  peace, 
while  Calchas  is  the  mantis  or  prophet  of  the  army. 
These  organs  of  the  deity  interpret  sometimes  from 
signs  and  omens,  sometimes  without  them.  There 
was  some  degree  of  approximation  between  the  two 
characters.  A  prophet,  or  seer,  might  be  an  inspector 
of  sacrifices,  though  he  did  not  offer  them.1  On  the 
other  hand,  a  priest  was  supposed  to  be  capable  of  in- 
terpreting the  divine  will.2  But  distinctions  of  the 
social  state  serve  sufficiently  to  manifest  the  separation 
of  the  two  characters,  even  independently  of  the  fact 
that  the  seer  or  prophet  never  offers  sacrifice.  For  the 
last-named  personage  is  distinguished  from  the  rest  of 
the  community  only  by  the  possession  of  his  gift ; 
whereas  the  priest  appears  to  be  wholly  exempted  from 
military  service,  and  a  kind  of  sanctity  attaches  to  his 
character,  as  is  most  of  all  clearly  shown  by  the  fact 
that  the  offence  of  Agamemnon,  which  brought  the 
Pest  upon  the  Greek  army,  consisted  only  in  his  re- 
fusal to  take  ransom  for  the  captive  daughter  of  a 
priest,  an  act  which  he  probably  might  have  ventured 
with  impunity  in  the  case  of  the  child  even  of  a  prince. 
Yet  the  teaching  office,  as  far  as  we  can  trace  it  at  all, 
seems  to  lie  less  with  the  priest,  than  with  the  prophet.3 

With  respect  to  temples,  it  is  plain  that  Apollo  had 
a  temple  at  Putho,  and  probable  that  Pallas  also  had 
one  at  Athens.    No  temple  is  named  in  Ithaca.  They 


1  II.  xxiv.  221.  Od.  xxii.  318. 
3  Od.  xxii.  313-315. 


2  II.  i.  62. 


THE  GREEKS  AND  THE  TROJANS.  461 

seem  to  have  abounded  in  Troas  :  and,  in  the  Sixth 
Odyssey,  the  building  of  temples 1  is  named  as  one  of 
the  elements  of  the  construction  of  a  city.  It  does  not 
follow  that  these  temples  were  in  all  cases  roofed 
buildings :  they  may  have  been  in  some  instances  no 
more  than  consecrated  inclosures.  Even  in  the  Greek 
camp,  there  was  a  central  place  for  Assemblies,  and  for 
Suits :  and  here  were  the  altars  of  the  gods.2  We  are 
not  entitled  to  infer  from  the  existence  of  a  temple  in 
any  particular  place,  the  existence  of  a  priesthood. 

The  grove  (alsos)  appears  to  have  been  a  common 
form  for  the  site  of  religious  worship,  both  in  and  out 
of  Greece. 

In  Troy,  we  hear  of  a  statue  or  image  of  Athene^3 
to  which  was  offered  the  Eobe,  presented  by  the  Trojan 
women  in  their  solemn  procession.  And  on  the  Shield 
of  Achilles  there  are  delineated  figures  4  of  that  goddess 
and  of  Ar£s  respectively,  together  with  those  of  the 
armed  bands  under  their  several  patronage.  But  no 
sanctity  attends  these  figures  ;  they  are  simple  repre- 
sentations of  Art.  We  have  no  trustworthy  trace  of 
a  statue  used  in  worship,  except  the  solitary  case  just 
named  in  Troy.  And  the  common  expression  of  Ho- 
mer, that  the  disposition  of  events  lies  in  the  lap  of 
the  gods,  is  perhaps  sufficiently  explained  by  the  an- 
thropomorphic character  of  the  Olympic  scheme,  if 
indeed  it  requires  even  that  explanation. 

Lastly,  the  Trojans  appear  to  be  distinguished5  for 
punctuality  and  liberality  in  sacrifice.  But  we  hear  of 
much  neglect  of  this  matter  on  the  part  of  the  Greeks. 


1  Od.  vi.  10. 

4  II.  xviii.  516-519. 


2  II.  xi.  806-808. 
&  II.  iv.  48. 


3  II.  vi.  303. 


462 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


Menelaos,  one  of  the  best  and  purest  characters  among 
the  Greek  chieftains,  was  punished  for  his  omission  to 
offer  up  the  proper  hecatombs,  by  a  long  and  trying 
detention  in  Egypt;1  A  like  neglect  was  the  cause  of 
difficulties  in  the  general  Return  of  the  Greek  army.2 
And  before  Troy,  in  the  hasty  construction  of  the 
trench  and  rampart,  the  whole  of  the  army  forgot  the 
proper  hecatombs.3  The  Trojans,  then,  much  excelled 
their  enemies  in  religious  observance.  It  seems  also 
true  that,  as  between  Greek  and  Greek,  the  pious  ob- 
servers of  the  law  of  sacrifice  were  the  better  men. 
But  we  can  in  no  manner  claim  for  the  Trojans  a 
morality  superior  to  that  of  their  opponents. 

Rather,  indeed,  the  reverse.  In  the  War  of  Troy, 
justice  is  plainly  with  the  Greeks.  Of  course  I  speak 
of  the  delineation  of  the  case  such  as  we  have  it  in 
Homer,  and  do  not  inquire  how  far  the  Poet  may  have 
caused  the  scale  to  incline  on  behalf  of  his  country  by 
the  weight  of  his  own  thoughts  and  wishes.  The  crime 
of  Paris  would  have  been  gross,  had  it  been  merely  an 
elopement.  But  it  was  an  abduction  ;  and  an  abduc- 
tion, too,  attended  with  mere  thievery  of  goods.  These 
features  in  our  eyes  are  aggravations ;  probably,  in 
those  of  Homer  and  his  contemporaries,  they  may  have 
tended  to  mitigate  the  ofTence,  by  imparting  to  it  some 
of  the  features  of  war.4  And,  in  those  days,  abduction 
was  probably  not  regarded  as  criminal  in  itself.  But 
there  always  remains  the  grave  offence  of  violated 
hospitality.  And  accordingly,  while  Helen  shows 
marks  of  aversion  for  Paris,  the  Trojan  people  hate 

1  Od.  iv.  351-353.  2  Od.  iii.  141-145.  3  n.  vii.  450. 

4  Compare  the  case  of  Heracles  and  Iphitos,  Od.  xxi.  22-30. 


THE  GREEKS  AND  THE  TROJANS.  463 

him  like  black  death.1  He  contrives  to  hold  his  place 
by  effrontery,  and  by  bribes  ; 2  and  he  is  the  object  of 
sharp  rebuke  from  Hector.3  With  the  exception  of 
Menelaos,  we  find  much  less  indignation  among  the 
Greek  chiefs,  than  we  might  have  expected.  Perhaps 
we  may  reasonably  consider  that  in  this,  as  in  many 
later  cases,  the  original  causes  of  the  quarrel  were  to 
a  great  extent  lost  and  absorbed  in  its  following  inci- 
dents. Christian  ideas,  again,  would  fix  a  deeper  guilt 
on  Paris,  especially  under  the  actual  circumstances, 
according  as  his  adulterous  connection  was  more  pro- 
longed. But  the  offence  of  Paris  is  regarded  in  Homer 
as  arising  from  want  of  self-control,  rather  than  from 
hardened  wickedness.  It  is  always  treated  as  an  ate, 
into  which  weakness  enters,  and  not,  like  the  conduct 
of  the  Suitors,  as  an  atasthalie,  which  is  purely  de- 
liberate and  hardened.  The  evil  act  once  perpetrated, 
Paris  had  a  marriage  of  fact  with  Helen,  who  was  in- 
stalled into  the  family  of  Priam  :  and  of  this  marriage, 
odious  as  his  character  must  be  held,  he  is .  in  some 
sort  the  defender.  It  was  not  wholly  unlike  the  steal- 
ing of  a  birthright ;  which,  once  acquired,  was  valid. 
So  the  offence  of  Helen  did  not  lie  in  living  with  a 
man  who  was  not  her  husband,  so  much  as  having 
taken  one  husband  in  exchange  for  another. 

It  is  not  unlikely  that  a  more  base  and  less  manly 
morality  among  the  Trojans  may  help  to  account  for 
the  patient  endurance  of  so  much  privation  and 
calamity  for  the  sake  of  a  man,  who  did  not  even  re- 
deem his  vices  (so  to  speak)  by  personal  courage,  or  by 
refinement  of  manners.4    This  conjecture  is  certainly 


i  B.  iii.  428-436  ;  vi.  352. 
3  H.  iii.  46-53. 


2  II.  vii.  354-364 ;  xi.  123. 
4  See  the  whole  of  II.  iii. 


464 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


sustained 1  by  the  remark  of  the  Senators  on  the  wall. 
In  Ithaca  the  same  idea  is  ascribed  to  the  dissolute 
Suitors.2  But  much  of  the  cause  must,  I  think,  have 
lain  in  a  difference  of  institutions.  The  outward  forms 
of  polity  were  not,  indeed,  broadly  different.  We  have 
on  both  sides  a  King ;  a  Council,  or  Councillors  at  the 
least ;  and  an  Assembly.  But  we  have  no  indications 
of  that  spirit  of  freedom  in  the  Trojan  community, 
which  found  such  noble  scope  in  masculine  debate, 
and  even  in  positive  action,  among  the  Greeks.  On 
both  sides  we  find  the  germ  of  after-history :  the 
Trojans  bearing  in  many  points  the  more  Asiatic,  the 
Greeks  the  more  European  stamp.  The  one  type  leans 
to  fraud,  where  the  other  inclines  to  force.  King  Lao- 
medon  defrauds  Poseidon  and  Apollo  ;  Anchises  steals 
from  Laomedon,  Paris  from  Menelaos  :  when  Pandaros 
most  grossly  breaks  the  public  faith,  there  is  no 
reproach  :  Euphorbos  wounds  Patroclos  in  the  back. 
The  mild  Menelaos  declares,  that  the  sons  of  Priam 
cannot  be  trusted.3  Though  a  single  passage  in  the 
Odyssey  places  flat  perjury,  as  well  as  theft,  under  the 
patronage  of  Hermes,4  the  Greeks  appear,  throughout 
the  Iliad,  to  pursue  an  honorable  course  of  conduct. 

A  tendency,  again,  to  sensual  excess  appears  to  run 
in  the  royal  line  of  Troy,  under  much  less  of  restraint 
than  we  find  in  the  Greek  houses.  This  is  especially 
remarkable  in  the  mythology.  Aphrodite  and  Eos, 
goddesses  markedly  Trojan,  and  Demeter,  who  is  at 
least  Pelasgian,  condescended  to  irregular  relations 
with  men.5    So  it  is  with  the  Naiad  nymphs  of 

1  n.  iii.  156.  2  Od.  xviii.  160-212.  3  II.  iii.  105. 

4  Od.  xix.  396.         5  Od.  v.  121-127. 


THE  GREEKS  AND  THE  TROJANS. 


465 


Troas.1  But  about  the  goddesses  recognized  by  the 
Homeric  Greeks,  Pallas,  Artemis,  Persephone,  and 
even  Here,  we  hear  nothing  of  the  kind. 

The  polygamy  of  Priam  is  wholly  without  counter- 
part in  Greece.  It  seems,  however,  to  be  not  that  of 
a  dissolute  man,  but  of  the  head  of  a  family  regularly 
organized  :  not  personal,  but  traditional.  He  had  fifty 
sons,  nineteen  of  them  from  the  single  womb  of 
Hecuba ; 2  and  .  twelve  daughters.  Besides  Hecuba, 
who  was  the  principal  queen,  there  were  other  recog- 
nized wives ;  and  behind  them  again  were  concubines, 
or  else,  which  seems  less  probable,  women  in  no  per- 
manent relation  whatever  to  the  King.  As  ten  sons  of 
Antenor  (besides  one  spurious  son)  are  mentioned  in 
the  Iliad,  all  within  the  fighting  age,  and  as  his  wife 
Theano  is  still  blooming  (callipareos)^  it  seems  highly 
probable  that  he,  too,  may  have  had  more  wives  than 
one. 

Again,  while  the  guilty  act  of  Paris  appears  to  have 
been  regarded  without  moral  disapproval  in  Troy,  the 
first  act  of  Aigisthos,  the  corruption  of  Clutaimnestra, 
was  regarded  by  the  gods  as  a  crime,3  even  apart  from 
the  murder  of  Agamemnon  :  and  their  sentiment  prob- 
ably expresses  the  average  moral  judgment  of  the 
country.  Again,  it  was  the  main  part  of  the  guilt 
of  the  Suitors,  which  drew  down  so  terrible  a  retribu- 
tion, that  they  sought  to  wed  Penelope  while  her 
husband  might  still  be  supposed  to  be  alive.4 

The  prevalence  of  polygamy,  even  in  the  highest 
families,  is  obviously  adverse  to  the  rule  of  an  hered- 


1  II.  vi.  21 ;  xiv.  444 ;  xx.  384.  2  n  xxiv>  495  .  vi_  244,  248. 
3  Od.  i.  35.  *  Od.  xxii.  38. 

30 


466 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


itary  succession  to  the  crown.  And  it  seems  more 
than  doubtful,  from  the  Poems,  whether  this  rule  was 
observed  on  the  Trojan  side  as  fully  as  in  Greece. 
Sarpedon  and  Glaucos  are  both  called  Kings  :  yet  they 
belonged  to  the  same  kingdom,  and  they  were  cousins. 
Again,  Sarpedon  evidently  had  the  chief  place :  yet 
Glaucos  was  the  representative  of  the  royal  house  in 
the  male  line,  Sarpedon  only  in  the  female.  Among 
the  Greeks  the  title  of  King  is  only  given  to  one 
person  in  one  country,  who  must  be  either  in  pos- 
session, or  heir-apparent. 

In  the  recital  of  the  genealogy  from  Dardanos, 
iEneas  does  not  give  a  precedence  of  superiority  to 
either  branch ;  and  he  leaves 1  us  to  doubt,  or  to 
inquire  from  some  other  sources,  which  line  was 
the  senior,  the  Trojan  or  the  Dardanian.  Again, 
Achilles  expressly  taunts  that  chieftain  as  a  candi- 
date for  the  succession  in  Troy  after  the  death  of 
Priam.2 

Further,  it  appears  open  to  much  question,  which  of 
the  sons  of  Priam  himself  we  are  to  understand  to 
have  been  the  eldest.  The  whole  responsibility  of  com- 
mand evidently  lay  upon  Hector;  and  there. can  be  no 
doubt,  even  if  it  were  only  from  the  name  given  to  his 
infant  son  by  the  people,  that  he  was  already  the  king- 
designate  in  the  public  view.  But  that  name  would 
have  had  little  special  significance,  had  Hector  been 
sure  of  the  succession  by  mere  seniority.  While  the 
ability  and  value  of  Hector  are  of  themselves  sufficient 
to  account  for  his  prominent  place,  it  is  very  difficult, 
except  upon  the  supposition  that  seniority  was  more  or 


i  II.  xx.  231-240. 


2  II.  xx.  178-183. 


THE  GREEKS  AND  THE  TROJANS. 


467 


less  the  competing  element  with  merit,  to  account 
for  various  features  in  the  position  of  Paris.  Alone 
among  the  children  of  Priam,  he  enjoys  the  title  of 
Basileus  or  King,  which  is  never  given  to  Hector. 
Although  utterly  insignificant  as  a  warrior,  he  is  the 
chief  in  command  of  the  second  among  the  five  di- 
visions of  Trojans  in  the  great  battle  of  the  Twelfth 
Book,  as  Hector  is  of  the  first.1  Except  Hector,  Paris 
is  the  only  prince  who  has  a  separate  dwelling  of  his 
own  on  the  hill  of  Pergamos.  The  other  princes  all, 
married  as  well  as  unmarried,  sleep  in  the  palace 
of  their  father.  His  expedition  to  Greece  does  not 
absolutely  imply  his  being  the  eldest  son ;  but  perhaps 
best  accords  with  that  otherwise  far  from  improbable 
supposition. 

Again  ;  Paris,  according  to  the  representation  of  the 
Iliad,  had  been  in  manhood  for  at  least  twenty  years. 
But  Hector  had  one  child  only,  a  babe  in  arms.  The 
word  hebd,  which  expresses  a  full-grown,  but  still  a 
blooming,  manhood,  is  applied  to  Hector,2  but  not  to 
Paris.  It  is  applied  indeed  to  Odysseus  in  Scheriei ; 
but  this  is  when  he  had  been  preternaturally  beautified 
under  the  restoring  hand  of  Athend  ;  and  also  in  the 
complimentary  speech  of  a  host.3  We  cannot  suppose 
Hector  to  have  been  very  different  in  age  from 
Andromache :  but  she  must  still  have  been  young, 
for  her  own  grandfather  had  been  alive  during 
the  War.4  And  finally,  in  her  lament  over  her 
husband,  she  distinctly  calls  him  young.5  So  much 
as  to  the  apparent  seniority  of  Paris  ;  and,  with  this, 

1  II.  xii.  93.  2  ii.  xxii.  363.  3  Od.  viii.  136. 

*  II.  vi.  426-428.  5  II.  xxiv.  725. 


468 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


for  the  less  defined  and  more  lax  law  of  succession 
in  Troy. 

The  relation  of  Priam  to  the  districts  or  countries, 
which  supplied  the  several  contingents  of  his  force,  is 
but  indistinctly  conveyed  to  us.  Yet  it  is  probable 
from  the  arrangement  and  expressions  of  the  Trojan 
Catalogue,  and  from  minor  circumstances,  that,  besides 
his  kingdom  of  Ilion,  he  exercised  over  Dardania,  and 
at  least  three  other  districts,  an  authority  more  or  less 
like  to  that  of  Agamemnon  over  the  Greek  chieftains. 
However  this  may  be,  even  the  ancients  justly  described 
the  Trojan  war  as  the  conflict  of  the  Eastern  with 
the  Western  world.  And  it  foreshadowed  other  yet 
greater  conflicts,  down  to  our  own  day. 

Within  the  kingdom  of  Troy,  we  can  more  clearly 
discern  the  inferior  compactness  of  political  society, 
and  its  lower  spirit  of  intelligence  and  freedom.  We 
have  every  sign  that  the  Trojan  Elders  did  not  act 
collectively  as  a  Council.1  This  is  an  important 
defect  in  such  a  body  with  reference  to  the  means  of 
moral  influence.  But  Assemblies  met.  There  Anterior 
proposed,  and  Paris  refused,  the  surrender  of  Helen : 
popular  discontent  was  expressed  ;  and  we  are  expressly 
told,  that  he  was  able  to  procure  the  defeat  of  other 
such  proposals  only  by  corruption.2  An  Assembly 
agreed  to  ask  a  truce  for  the  burial  of  the  dead.  In 
an  Assembly,  Hector  somewhat  curtly  put  down  the 
opposition  of  Poludamas  as  a  stranger.3 

But  we  have  to  remark,  in  the  Trojan  Assembly,  as 
follows  :  — 


i  II.  ii.  788,  789. 


2  II.  vii.  369. 


3  II.  xii.  211-214. 


THE  GREEKS  AND  THE  TROJANS. 


469 


1.  That  there  is  no  sign  of  its  having  been  guided 
by  men  of  wisdom  and  valor,  but  only  by  age  and 
rank. 

2.  That  oratory  does  not  seem  to  have  been  em- 
ployed in  it  as  an  instrument  of  persuasion. 

3.  That  the  Elders,  who  assist  Priam  in  public 
affairs,  are  simply  the  old  men,  and  not,  as  with  the 
Greeks,  the  chief  and  able  men,  belonging  to  the  high 
families  of  the  State. 

4.  The  Trojan  Assembly  does  not  clearly  appear 
to  have  been  convened  on  special  occasions  :  but  per- 
haps rather  to  have  sat  in  permanence,  in  the  sense 
of  having  only  consisted  of  such  persons  as  might 
chance  to  be  present,  at  any  given  moment,  in  the 
places  of  public  resort.1 

There  seems  in  Troy  —  as  in  the  institutions  we  now 
term  Asiatic  —  to  be  nothing  to  stand  between  royalty 
and  the  people.  There  was  thus  less  balance  of  forces, 
less  security  against  precipitate  action ;  a  state  of  facts 
in  all  likelihood  accompanied  by  less  respect  for  public 
morality,  less  security  for  private  rights. 

The  Poet  has  given  us,  evidently  of  set  purpose, 
a  minor  indication  of  Trojan  inferiority,  in  the  con- 
trasts lie  presents  of  the  silence  and  self-possession 
of  the  Greeks,  with  the  din  and  buzz  of  the  Trojans, 
as  they  marched  to  battle.  At  the  burying  of  the  dead, 
both  armies  wept  and  were  silent :  but  the  silence  of 
the  Trojans  was  because  great  Priam  forbade  a  noise.2 
A  Trojan  Assembly  is  uneasy  and  excitable : 3  never 
a  Greek  one.    Even  for  the  expressions  of  approval, 


1  II.  ii.  788  ;  vii.  414. 

2  II.  vii.  426-432. 


Studies,  pp.  237  seqq. 

3  II.  vii.  346 ;  iii.  2,  8  ;  iv.  429,  436. 


470 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


different  words  are  used :  the  Greeks  were  eager  and 
vehement,  the  noise  of  the  Trojans  was  promiscuous 
and  tumultuous.  In  a  word,  all  through  the  Poems, 
the  Greek  mind  is  evidently  endowed  with  a  finer 
sense,  and  a  higher  intelligence. 


CHAPTER  XIII. 


The  Geography  of  Homer. 

Section  I.    The  Catalogue. 

The  Catalogue  of  Homer  is  a  great  attempt  to 
construct  what  may,  for  those  times,  be  justly  called  a 
cadastral  account  of  Greece  ;  together  with  an  outline 
of  the  Trojan  force,  sufficient  for  the  purposes  of  the 
Poem. 

In  348  lines,  it  contains  501  proper  names,  spread 
over  diverse  and  very  irregular  tracts  of  country,  and 
including  many  which  belonged  to  personal  history  and 
genealogy.  To  recite  this  part  of  the  Poem  with  accu- 
racy evidently  required  a  great  effort  of  memory. 
To  write  it,  would  have  required  no  more  effort,  per- 
haps indeed  less,  than  the  average  tenor  of  the  Iliad. 
Now  the  Invocation  to  the  Muses  at  the  commence- 
ment, the  most  formal  and  elaborate  which  the  Poems 
contain,  clearly  shows  that  the  Bard  was  about  to  un- 
dertake a  weighty  task.  Thus  the  Catalogue,  together 
with  its  introduction,  becomes  a  powerful  piece  of 
evidence  to  show  that  the  Iliad  was  not  written  but 
recited. 

Next;  the  Genealogies  of  the  Greek  Catalogue, 


472 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


eleTen  in  number,  testify  in  a  remarkable  manner  to 
the  historic  aims  of  the  Poet,  which  led  him  to  connect 
all  his  leading  personages  with  the  past,  at  the  very 
time  when  he  was  securing  to  them  a  deathless  heri- 
tage in  the  future.  Again,  the  Poet  has  avoided  the 
error  of  confounding  his  primary  with  his  secondary 
leaders.  The  greater  chiefs  have  their  descents  traced 
singly,  in  various  parts  of  the  Iliad,  so  as  to  give  them 
due  prominence.  But  in  the  Catalogue  a  number  of 
secondary  genealogies  are  massed  together. 

In  his  performance  of  this  operation,  where  a  re- 
citing Bard  was  to  lose  the  aid  commonly  afforded  him 
by  the  natural  continuity  of  his  subject-matter,  Homer 
has  sought  for  a  substitute  in  a  kind  of  mental  figure- 
drawing.  He  divides  the  whole  territory  of  Greece 
and  the  Islands  into  three  circles,  more  or  less  regular 
and  perfect ;  with  a  fourth  figure  of  the  nature  of  a 
zigzag. 

The  first  circle  begins  with  the  Boeotians  and  ends 
with  Mycenae  ;  containing  nine  contingents.1 

The  second  is  a  zigzag,  beginning  with  Lacedaemon, 
and  ending  with  the  Aitoloi ;  and  comprises  seven 
contingents.2 

The  third  is  part  of  a  circle  of  islands,  beginning 
with  Crete,  and  ending  with  Carpathos  and  other  small 
islands.    This  portion  gives  four  contingents.3 

In  the  fourth,  or  Thessalian  portion,4  it  is  more 
difficult,  and  in  some  cases  hardly  feasible,  to  identify 
the  sites ;  but,  as  far  as  may  be,  the  Poet  appears  to 
adhere  to  the  same  circular  arrangement.  Here  also 
we  have  nine  contingents. 

i  II.  ii.  494-580.  2  581-644.  3  645-680.         *  681-759. 


THE  GEOGRAPHY  OF  HOMER. 


473 


In  each,  then,  of  these  four  divisions  of  the  terri- 
tory, the  Poet  makes  his  figure  his  guide,  and  pro- 
ceeds from  each  district  to  the  one  lying  next  to  it 
on  the  proper  line,  until  the  figure  is  completed. 
Water  sometimes  intervenes  ;  but  no  territory  seems 
to  be  skipped  over. 

Thus  there  is  a  clue  all  along,  except  indeed  at  the 
points  of  transition  from  one  division  to  another.  For 
these,  also,  he  seems  to  have  provided.  In  each  case 
he  ends  with  a  district,  the  neighbor  to  which,  accord- 
ing to  the  line  of  his  figure,  has  already  been  disposed 
of.  Thus  in  the  first,  were  he  to  go  beyond  Mycenae, 
he  would  find  himself  among  the  Boeotians  again.  So 
that  he  is  as  it  were  reminded,  by  this  contrivance,  to 
recommence. 

In  the  Trojan  Catalogue,  I  find  but  two  geneal- 
ogies ;  and  one  of  them  is  that  of  the  Pelasgian 
leader.  Now  the  Pelasgian  blood,  it  will  be  remem- 
bered, seems  to  be  the  common  bond  between  the 
masses  on  each  side. 

In  the  Greek  Catalogue,  Homer  specifies  the  respec- 
tive amounts  of  the  contingents  of  force  supplied  from 
the  different  portions  of  the  country.  This  is  evidently 
meant  to  give  to  each  chief  and  district  his  due  posi- 
tion, relatively  to  the  rest.  In  Troas  he  pursues  no 
such  arrangement ;  for  he  had  no  such  object.  And 
among  the  Epicouroi,  or  Allies,1  there  was  another 
difficulty  ;  as  they  came  and  went  in  successive  reliefs, 
whereas  the  Achaians  were  a  permanent  force. 

Generally,  I  cannot  but  think  that  the  comparison 
of  the  two  Catalogues  is  highly  unfavorable  to  the 


i  II.  ii.  816-839. 


474 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


theory  which  regards  Homer  as  an  Asiatic  Greek :  a 
theory  which,  in  my  opinion,  should  also  be  repudiated 
upon  more  comprehensive  grounds.  The  Greek  Cata- 
logue is  charged  throughout  with  what  I  may  call  local 
color  and  with  visual  epithets :  epithets  which  imply 
some  personal  familiarity,  and  raise  up  a  prospect  or 
scene  before  the  mental  eye  of  a  reader  or  a  hearer. 
In  the  fifty- two  lines  of  the  Trojan  Catalogue,  it  would 
be  difficult  to  point  out  more  than  eight  of  these : 
the  precipitous  tops  of  Tereie  and  Mucale  ;  the  fertile 
Larissa ;  the  wide-flowing  of  the  limpid  Axios ;  the 
eddying  Xanthos  ;  the  dark  water  of  Aisepos ;  the 
lofty  Eruthinoi ;  the  wooded  hill  of  Phtheiroi.1  Four 
only  of  these  come  from  Asia  Minor  to  the  south  of 
Troas,  with  which  Homer  is  supposed  to  be  so  familiar. 
On  the  other  side  of  the  ^Egean,  ten  at  least  of  such 
epithets  are  found  within  the  thirteen  lines  that  de- 
scribe the  places,  which  supplied  the  Boeotian  con- 
tingent. 

Section  II.    The  Plain  of  Troy? 

The  leading  topical  points  in  the  plain  of  Troy  are 
as  follows :  — 

1.  The  Scamandrian  plain,3  near  the  river  Scaman- 
dros,  forming  the  northern  and  western  part  of  the 
Trojan  plain,  and  reaching  up  to  or  near  the  Encamp- 
ment. 

2.  The  Ile'ian  plain,4  near  the  city,  lying  south  and 
perhaps  east  from  it. 


1  II.  ii.  825,  829,  841,  849,  855,  868,  869,  877. 

2  Of  this  subject,  no  notice  was  taken  in  the  '  Studies  on  Homer.' 

3  II.  ii.  465.  4  II.  xxi.  558. 


THE  GEOGRAPHY  OP  HOMER. 


475 


3.  The  Scaian  Gates,1  north  of  the  city,  the  ordinary 
way  of  exit  to  the  plain.   Near  them  is  the  phegos.2 

4.  The  Dardanian  Gates,  south  of  the  city,  commu- 
nicating with  Dardania  on  the  hill.    II.  xx.  216-218. 

5.  The  junction  of  the  rivers.    II.  v.  774. 

6.  The  ford  of  Xanthos,  and  the  monument  of  Ilos 
near  it.    II.  xxiv.  349. 

7.  The  toiveog,  or  wild  fig-tree,  near  this  ford  (346- 
353  and  692-694),  and  the  tomb  of  Ilos.  Here  was 
a  Gxomri  or  place  convenient  for  observation,  and  a 
wagon  road.  All  these  are  near  the  city.  II.  vi.  433  ; 
xi.  166, 167  ;  xxii.  145. 

8.  The  0Qco(j{i6g,  or  roll,  of  the  plain  near  the  north- 
ern extremity,  and  the  Encampment  of  the  Greeks. 
II.  x.  160  ;  xi.  56 ;  xx.  3. 

9.  The  Mound  of  Aisuetes,  near  enough  to  the  En- 
campment for  observations.    II.  ii.  793. 

10.  The  hillock  Batieia,  in  the  southern  part  of  the 
plain,  at  some  distance  from  the  city.    II.  ii.  813. 

11.  The  two  fountains  of  Scamandros.  II.  xxii.  147. 

12.  The  mouths  of  the  two  rivers,  distinct  one  from 
another.    See  II.  xii.  21. 

13.  The  quarters  of  Achilles  and  of  Telamonian  Ajax 
respectively,  marking  the  extremes  east  and  west  of  the 
Greek  Encampment  by  the  shore.    II.  xi.  5-9. 

The  chief  questions  which  arise  are  two. 

1.  In  what  manner  can  the  description  given  by 
Homer  of  the  several  parts  be  combined  into  a  self- 
consistent  whole  ? 

2.  In  what  manner  can  that  description  be  reconciled 
with  the  actual  geography  of  the  plain  of  Troy  under- 
stood, as  it  best  may,  from  its  present  condition  ? 


1  II.  iii.  145,  et  alibi. 


2  II.  vi.  237. 


476 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


The  first  of  these  two  questions  presents  no  insur- 
mountable difficulty. 

We  have  to  imagine  an  irregular  oblong  lying  north 
and  south ;  the  north  end  formed  by  the  coast  and  the 
Greek  line  of  ships  and  cantonments,  from  that  of 
Achilles  on  the  west  to  that  of  Ajax  on  the  east,  run- 
ning along  it ;  the  eastern  side,  by  Simoeis  ;  the  western 
by  Scamandros,  with  rough  and  steep  banks  above,  and 
with  marshy  lands  near  the  mouth.  The  southern  part 
of  the  plain  is  closed  by  the  roots  of  Ida ;  and  in  the 
south-western  corner  lies  the  city  with  a  gate  south- 
wards towards  the  hill,  and  towards  Dardania  which  lay 
within  its  recesses  ;  also  a  gate  (the  Scaian  Gate),  with 
the  ground  descending  towards  the  plain  northwards. 

Passing  from  the  north  towards  this  gate,  and  having 
on  the  right  hand  the  river,  we  come  along  a  waggon- 
road  to  the  wild  fig-tree,  where  is  the  mound  or  tomb 
of  Ilos,  used  apparently  as  a  place  of  observation,  like 
Batieia  and  the  tomb  of  Aisuetes,1  at  the  other  end  of 
the  plain.  This  is  hard  by  the  river.  We  then  have 
the  Scaian  Gate  on  the  left ;  and  farther  on  are  the 
two  fountains  of  the  Scamandros,  near  to  which  Hector 
passes,*in  making  the  circuit  of  the  city. 

It  is  plain,  that  there  was  a  communication  between 
the  rivers  ;  but  probably  one  dry  in  summer ;  and  we 
may  take  notice  that  it  was  not  in  the  fierce  Scaman- 
dros, but  in  Simoeis,  that  there  lay  both  heroes  and  their 
spoils  ;  and  this  in  the  dust,  not  in  the  waters,  as  Virgil 
has  vividly,  but  carelessly,  represented.2 

The  ford  of  Xanthos  we  must  understand  to  be  a 
ford  leading  to  the  westward,  not  one  crossed  between 


i  II.  ii.  793. 


2  ^En.  i.  100. 


THE  GEOGRAPHY  OF  HOMER. 


477 


the  city  and  the  camp.  With  these  suppositions,  the 
topography  of  the  plain  appears  to.be  self-consistent. 

The  best  examination  I  have  been  able  to  make  of 
the  second  question  leads  me  to  the  conclusion  that 
the  description  of  Homer  cannot  be  accurately  fitted  to 
the  natural  features  of  the  plain,  as  they  now  are,  or 
even  as  we  can  probably  suppose  them  to  have  been 
some  three  thousand  years  ago. 

There  is  no  site  near  the  two  fountains,  on  which 
the  city  can  have  been  placed,  of  such  a  nature  as  to 
allow  of  the  threefold  circuit  ascribed  to  Hector  flying, 
and  to  Achilles  pursuing  him. 

The  general  idea  conveyed  by  the  Iliad  of  the  dis- 
tance between  the  city  and  the  encampment  is,  that  it 
was  short.  After  the  second  Battle,  in  Book  viii. 
Hector  holds  an  Assembly.  The  Trojans  had  pressed 
upon  the  Greek  entrenchment,  and  their  gathering  is 
away  from  the  ships,  vooqi  vmv  (v.  490)  ;  but  this 
seems  to  be  explained  by  what  follows  as  meaning 
simply  clear  of  the  field  of  battle,  whereon  lay  the  dead 
bodies.  And  it  is  expressly  called £  near '  (hyyvg)  that  is, 
near  the  ships,  in  II.  ix.  232.  But  Hector  proceeds  to 
give  directions  for  fetching  oxen  and  sheep,  with  wine 
and  corn,  from  Ilion  for  the  immediate  repast ;  and  here- 
with the  wood  for  cooking  and  for  watchfires  (505-507). 

Again,  in  II.  viii.  532,  Hector  says,  4  to-morrow  we 
shall  see  whether  Diomed  will  drive  me  from  the  ships 
to  the  wall  (evidently  of  the  city),  or  whether  I  shall 
slay  and  spoil  him.'  Now  the  idea  of  the  pursuit  from 
the  ships  to  the  wall  and  the  corresponding  movement 
of  the  armies,  are  wholly  inapplicable  to  a  distance  of 
five  or  six  or  more  miles. 

On  the  whole,  the  length  of  the  plain,  and  the  dis- 


478 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


tance  of  the  two  fountains  from  the  shore,  are  not 
in  harmony  with  the  descriptions  of  the  forward  and 
retrograde  operations  of  the  armies  which  took  place 
on  the  great  day  of  battles,  ending  with  the  unwilling 
retirement  of  the  Sun  in  II.  xviii.  239.  Other  incon- 
sistencies of  a  like  nature  might  be  pointed  out. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  number  of  the  natural  feat- 
ures portrayed,  and  the  actual  correspondence  of  most 
of  them,  when  taken  individually,  with  those  we  now 
discern,  establish  the  general  authenticity  of  the  scene. 
They  also  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  Homer  may  have 
seen  it  in  person  ;  or  may,  by  the  power  of  a  vigorous 
imagination,  have  conceived  its  general  character,  and 
the  relative  position  of  the  points,  from  the  narratives 
of  eye-witnesses. 

But  it  seems  plain,  that  he  did  not  sing  either  on  the 
spot,  or  to  persons  minutely  acquainted  with  the  topo- 
graphy ;  and  not  unlikely,  that  he  generalized  his  mate- 
rials, and  used  them  with  a  certain  license,  as  a  poet, 
for  the  purposes  of  his  art. 

Lastly  :  I  cannot  but  observe  the  analogy  between 
this  lo^se  placement  of  objects,  each  of  which  singly 
had  been  vividly  conceived,  and  the  indefinite  method 
of  handling  geographical  points  on  a  large  scale,  in  the 
Outer  Voyage  of  the  Odyssey.  In  the  latter  case  we 
are  morally  certain  that  he  spoke  at  secondhand  ;  and 
this  tends  to  diminish  the  unlikelihood  that  the  Song 
of  Troy  was  composed  without  personal  experience  of 
the  spot  to  aid  the  work. 


THE  GEOGRAPHY  OF  HOMER. 


479 


Section  III.    The  Outer  Greography. 

The  geography  of  Greek  experience,  as  exhibited  by 
Homer,  is  limited,  speaking  generally,  to  the  iEgean 
and  its  coasts,  with  the  Propontis  as  its  limit  in  the 
North-east,  with  Crete  for  a  southern  boundary,  and 
with  the  addition  of  the  western  coast  of  the  peninsula 
and  its  islands,  as  far  northward  as  the  Leucadian  rock. 
Kespecting  that  rock,  and  respecting  the  conformation 
of  Corfu  (Scherie)  and  the  shape  of  Ithaca,  Homer  had 
some  accurate  information.  But  a  visit  to  that  region 
in  1858-9  convinced  me  that  the  Poet,  who  described 
the  view  of  Corfu1  from  the  north  as  lying  on  the  sea 
like  a  shield,  never  eould  have  seen  it ;  that  he  was  not 
personally  acquainted  with  the  topography  of  Ithaca ; 
that  he  guessed  at,  and  over-estimated,  its  size  ;  and,  as 
is  demonstrable  from  several  passages  in  the  Odyssey,2 
that  he  has  given  it  a  wrong  relative  position. 

Beyond  the  limits  I  have  named,  all  ordinary  navi- 
gation was  conducted  by  the  Phoenicians  ;  and  upon 
these  mariners,  possibly  in  a  few  cases  on  their  settlers 
or  colonists  in  Greece,  Homer  must  have  depended  for 
his  information.  At  any  period,  such  information  could 
only  give  rise  to  very  inaccurate  geographical  results. 
But  we  cannot  even  expect  a  resemblance  to  the  actual 
face  of  earth,  in  a  case  where  not  only  are  the  points 
described  by  those  who  would  naturally  seek  both  to 
excite  and  to  deter,  but  where  they  could  be  nowhere 
arranged  and  digested,  except  only  in  the  brain  of  the 

1  Od.  v.  281. 

2  Especially  Od.  iv.  844-847,  and  Od.  ix.  25-26 ;  lines  which  it  has 
in  vain  been  attempted  to  force  into  conformity  with  actual  geography. 


480 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


Poet,  ideally  compounding  in  the  mind  what  fell  upon 
the  ear. 

It  appears  to  me,  that  interpreters  have  been  wholly 
wrong,  when  they  have  laboriously  strained  their  en- 
deavors to  fit  the  Outer  Geography  of  Homer  to  the  actual 
surface  of  the  globe.  Unwilling  to  recognize  error  in 
his  descriptions,  they  have  closed  their  eyes  to  much 
really  indisputable  evidence  of  it  that  the  text  supplies ; 
and  have,  after  a  sort,  assigned  to  him  geographical 
knowledge  which  he  did  not  possess,  at  the  expense  of 
that  mental  self-consistency,  and  that  plastic  power$ 
with  both  of  which  he  was  endowed  in  a  degree  never 
surpassed  among  the  sons  of  men.  It  was  no  reproach 
to  him,  if  he  believed  in  a  great  sea,  connecting  the 
Adriatic  and  the  Euxine ;  but  it  would  have  been  at 
variance  with  all  the  rules  of  his  mental  action,  if  he 
had  spoken  without  any  definite  meaning,  when  he 
treats  of  sailing  and  floating  distances,  of  the  direction 
of  the  wind,  or  of  the  position  of  the  stars  :  if  he  had 
forgotten  his  distinction  between  land  of  the  continent 
and  island,  or  if  he  had  placed  the  sunrise  in  the  West. 

No  doubt  his  descriptions  are  very  vague  in  some 
cases,  and  especially  as  to  the  Island  of  Calypso.  The 
fact  seems  to  be,  that  he  was  misled  not  only  by  false- 
hood, but  by  truth.  When  informants,  speaking  of  the 
same  region,  described  it  as  one  of  all  but  perpetual 
day,  and  also  as  one  of  night  all  but  perpetual,  although 
both  these  statements  were  true,  he  had  not  the  key  to 
their  truth  in  the  annual  revolution  of  the  earth  com- 
bined with  the  declension  of  its  axis  from  the  perpendic- 
ular ;  and  thus  he  could  only  seek  refuge  in  vagueness 
from  contradiction.  Again,  when  he  heard  of  great 
sea-currents,  which  set  through  the  Bosphorus,  the 


THE  GEOGRAPHY  OP  HOMER. 


481 


Straits  of  Messina,  the  Straits  of  YenikalS,  and  the 
Straits  of  Gibraltar  respectively,  what  means  could  he 
possess,  considering  the  palpable  points  of  resemblance, 
of  effectually  separating  each  one  of  these  from  the 
others  ?  Hence  it  is,  as  we  shall  find,  that  he  carries 
his  Thrinakie  (or  Sicily)  to  the  immediate  vicinity  of 
the  Bosphorus,  consecrates  it  to  the  Sun,  and  places 
there  the  Oxen  and  the  Nymphs  belonging  to  that 
deity. 

The  proper  object  of  our  search  is,  not  a  forced  ac- 
commodation of  Homer's  conceptions  to. a  basis  of  fact 
with  which  he  was  unacquainted,  but  simply  a  copy,  if 
we  can  get  it,  of  the  map,  which  he  constructed  in  his 
brain  from  the  materials  supplied  by  Phoenician  dis- 
course or  legend.  And  the  proper  mode  of  search  must 
be,  to  take  for  our  primary  authority  his  own  state- 
ments of  distance,  direction,  and  physical  features  ;  and 
then,  but  only  in  subordination  to  this  rule,  to  see 
where  and  how  far  they  fit  any  portion  of  what  actually 
exists ;  moreover,  whether  they  so  correspond  with  it 
as  it  is  situate  in  its  proper  place,  or  as  he  has  arbi- 
trarily transplanted  it  to  some  other. 

There  are  fractions  of  border-land,  between  the  Inner 
or  home,  and  the  outer  or  wholly  foreign  sphere,  which 
receive  somewhat  of  a  mixed  treatment.  To  this  group 
Scherie  belongs :  and  the  land  of  the  Lotos-eaters  pos- 
sibly may  be  but  another  phase  of  Egypt.  Epirus 
again,  and  the  country  of  the  Glactophagoi  and  other 
nations,  over  whom  Zeus  directs  his  view  at  the  outset 
of  the  Thirteenth  Iliad,1  belong  to  this  zone,  as  does 
Phoenicia,  if  not  Cyprus. 


1  II.  xiii.  3-6. 
31 


482 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


Our  data  for  constructing  an  Homeric  map  of  the 
Outer  Geography  seems  to  be  chiefly  as  follows :  — 

1.  The  points  of  the  horizon  marked  for  morning 
and  evening  respectively,  connect  themselves  with  two 
of  Homer's  winds.  His  Zephuros  is  akin  to  zophos, 
and  knephas,  the  darkness:1  his  Euros  to  e5s,2  the 
morning,  and  perhaps  to  his  euroeis,  an  epithet  used 
by  him  four  times  only,  and  in  each  case  to  describe 
the  Underworld.  Sunrise  and  sunset,  with  him,  verge, 
though  not  perhaps  with  uniform  precision,  to  the 
south  of  East,  and  to  the  north  of  West  respectively. 

2.  And  such  are  the  directions,  from  which  Zephuros 
and  Euros  blow.  But  it  is  plain,  as  Zephuros  blows 
from  Thrace  upon  the  iEgean,3  that  his  range  also 
approximates  to  the  north  pole  on  the  western  side  : 
and  further,  that,  as  Boreas  blows  from  the  same 
quarter,  he  takes  up  the  next  arc  of  the  horizon,  and 
may  be  denned  as  a  north-north-east  wind;  a  title 
which  the  same  wind,  as  far  as  my  memory  serves  me, 
still  ^bears  in  the  Adriatic.  Again,  Euros  and  Notos, 
the  third  and  fourth  of  Homer's  winds,  are  associated 
together  as  a  pair,  raising  the  iEgean  from  the  South 
nearly  as  Boreas  and  Zephuros  catch  it  from  the  North. 
The  greater  portion,  however,  of  the  arc  covered  by  the 
southern  pair  is  to  the  east  of  the  Pole,  by  the  north- 
ern pair  to  the  west.  It  is  not  probable  that  Homer 
had  names  for  winds  from  all  points  of  the  compass, 
or  that  he  did  more  than  mark  inartificially  the  direc- 
tions from  which  the  winds  of  his  actual  experience 
principally  blew.    Notos  may  probably  be  a  South 


1  Buttinann,  Lexil.  in  voc.  Kelmvog. 

2  Liddell  and  Scott,  in  voc. 


3  II.  ix.  4. 


THE  GEOGRAPHY  OF  HOMER. 


483 


wind,  blowing  from  near  that  pole  on  either  side : 
Euros  is  between  Notos  and  the  east. 

3.  Next  to  these,  we  have  to  mark  Homer's  meas- 
ures of  sea  distances.  Of  extended  land  distances 
he  has  no  measures  at  all ;  a  separate  proof  of  the  very 
limited  range  of  the  land  experience  of  the  Greeks. 

(#)  Homer  measures  the  time  of  a  voyage  from 
Troas  to  Phthia ;  and  from  Crete  to  Egypt.1  The 
result  of  these  measurements  is,  to  give  some  ninety 
miles  as  a  good  average  day's  journey  of  a  ship  using 
sails  or  oars,  under  favorable  circumstances.  With 
peculiar  good  fortune,  that  distance  might  be  exceeded. 

(b)  In  a  floating  or  drift  passage  on  the  waves,  we 
can  trace  Homer's  idea  of  what  was  possible  by  the 
supposed  transit  of  Odysseus  from  a  point  near  Crete 
to  the  Thesprotoi.  It  appears  to  be  about  half  the 
rate  of  a  ship's  motion,  or  two  miles  an  hour. 

(c)  The  floating  of  a  raft  may  probably  be  taken  at 
a  little  more,  or  two  and  a  half. 

Thus  we  should  have  ninety-six  miles,  forty-eight 
miles,  and  sixty  miles  a  day  as  our  results  respectively. 

These  are,  of  course,  but  rude  measures,  yet  they 
are  not  unimportant  aids  in  our  inquiry. 

(d)  The  rate  of  a  Scherian  ship  is  described  by  com- 
parison with  a  bird's  flight,  or  a  four-horse  chariot 
scouring  the  plain.  4  It  would  go,'  says  Alkinoos,  '  to 
Eubcea  (or  perhaps  to  Euboea  and  back)  in  a  day.' 
We  cannot,  I  think,  put  it  at  less  than  thrice  the  speed 
of  the  ordinary  ship. 

The  key  to  the  great  contrast  between  the  Outer 
Geography  and  the  facts  of  nature  lies  in  the  belief 


i  H.  ix.  362.    Od.  xiv.  257. 


484 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


of  Homer,  that  a  great  sea  occupied  the  space,  where 
we  know  the  heart  of  the  European  Continent  to  lie. 
Proofs  and  indications  of  this  belief  are  to  be  found, 
such  as  to  place  it  beyond  denial  or  even  doubt. 

(a)  For  example,  we  find  one  of  these  in  th«  voyage 
of  the  Phaiakes  to  Eubcea,  which  was  certainly  not 
supposed  to  take  place  round  the  whole  coast  of  the 
Greek  Peninsula,  for  the  Phaiakes  are  supposed  to 
hang  as  strangers  on  the  outer  skirt  of  the  Greek 
world,  not  to  traverse  all  its  chief  waters.1  It  must 
therefore  have  been  a  passage  by  a  supposed  northern 
sea. 

(5)  When  Hermes  travels  from  Olympos  to  the 
Island  of  Calypso,  he  passes  over  Pieria,  and  then 
sweeps  down  upon  the  sea.2  That  sea  must  therefore 
have  been  in  the  north  or  north-east.  The  journey  of 
Here  over  Pieria  to  Emathia  and  Lemnos 3  shows  the 
acquaintance  of  the  Poet  with  the  general  direction  of 
those  countries. 

(tf)  The  Shades  of  the  Suitors,  on  their  way  to  the 
Underworld,  take  a  northerly  direction,  pass  the  Leu- 
cadian  rock,  in  a  journey  towards  the  stream  of  Ocean, 
and  the  gates  of  the  Sun.4  Can  there  be  a  clearer 
declaration  than  this  that  they  were  to  pass  into  the 
east  along  the  Adriatic  —  apparently  avoiding  the 
known  land  of  Greece  on  their  journey  ? 

Next,  Homer  appears  to  have  compounded  into  one 
group  two  sets  of  Phoenician  reports  concerning  the 
entrance  from  without  to  the  Thalassa  or  Medi- 
terranean :  one  of  them  referring  to  the  Straits  of 


i  Od.  vii.  19-26. 
3  II.  xiv.  225-230. 


2  Od.  v.  43-58. 
4  Od.  xxiv.  11-14. 


THE  GEOGRAPHY  OF  HOMER. 


485 


Messina,  with  their  Scylla  and  Charybdis ;  the  other 
to  the  Bosphorus  and  itsPlanctai.  It  is  also  very 
easy  to  believe,  that  with  each  of  these  narrow  passages 
he  associated  another  strait  beyond  it  at  a  distance 
of  several  hundred  miles,  namely  the  Straits  of  Gib- 
raltar with  the  first,  and  the  Straits  of  Yenikale  with 
the  second  :  and  the  striking  resemblance  of  these  last 
to  one  another,  in  the  cardinal  point  of  presenting 
at  all  times  an  inward  flowing  current,  would  tend 
to  favor  the  confusion.  The  Ocean  was,  in  Homer's 
system,  the  feeder  of  the  Sea :  he  tells  us  in  the 
Odyssey  distinctly  enough  of  one  sea-passage  to  the 
Ocean,  but  he  nowhere  glances  at  the  existence  of  any 
second  access. 

This  Ocean  mouth,  to  which  he  conducts  Odysseus, 
is  unequivocally  placed  in  the  East,  near  the  island  of 
Aiaia,  and  the  rising  Sun.  To  the  left  and  North,  lie 
the  people  of  the  Kimmerians  hid  in  fog,  for  which  the 
Black  Sea  is  even  now  said  to  be  remarkable.  KirkS 
is  the  daughter  of  Aietes,  to  whose  country  Jason  had 
sailed  through  the  Bosphorus.  And  giving  the  dark- 
ness a  place  near  the  dawn  is  a  proceeding  necessary 
to  complete  the  idea  of  morning.  The  mouth  of  the 
Underworld  is  farther  southward,  inasmuch  as  Odys- 
seus is  carried  to  it  by  the  Wind  Boreas,  up  the  Ocean- 
Stream.  The  whole  of  his  voyage,  up  to  this  point,  is 
accomplished  without  his  being  obliged  to  traverse  any 
dangerous  narrows.  But,  pursued  by  the  vengeance 
of  Poseidon,  who  rules  the  outer  or  Phoenician  Tha- 
lassa,  he  eschews  returning  by  the  same  open,  length- 
ened, and  menacing  route.  Kirk£  accordingly  apprises 
him  of  a  short  passage,  by  which  he  may  soon  find 
himself  once  more  within  the  margin  of  the  Greek  or 


486  JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 

iEgean  waters.  This  is  the  Bosphorus ;  near  which 
the  Poet  plants  Thrinakie,  an  island  evidently  projected 
in  his  mind  on  the  basis  of  ideas  derived  from  Sicily, 
and  with  it  the  Scylla  and  Charybdis  of  the  Straits  of 
Messina. 

This  transportation  of  western  features  to  the  East 
is  further  illustrated  by  the  Homeric  treatment  of  Atlas. 
For,  associated  though  he  be  in  general  tradition  with 
the  coast  of  Africa,  and  the  Straits  of  Gibraltar,  he  is 
witli  Homer  the  Father  of  Calypso,  whose  island  plainly 
lies  in  the  northern  and  eastern  waters,  since  it  seems 
to  be  Boreas  who  brings  Odysseus  from  thence  to 
Ithaca. 

The  general  result  of  this  blending  is,  that  the  sup- 
posed Ocean  mouth  in  the  Euxine  gets  the  benefit  of 
the  open  sea-route  which  really  leads  to  the  Straits  of 
Gibraltar ;  and  the  real  Ocean  mouth  at  Gibraltar  has 
credit  for  being  placed  in  a  northern  latitude  and  a 
distant  eastern  longitude ;  while  the  Faro  and  the 
BdBpborus,  in  consequence  of  this  identification,  are 
brought  near  to  one  another:  each  group  of  reports 
thus  throwing  its  own  separate  attributes  into  the  com- 
mon stock. 

The  Bosphorus  must  be  considered  not  as  belonging 
to  the  Greek  world,  but  yet  as  fast  linked  to  it,  and 
therefore  as  a  point  fixed  by  practical  experience,  and 
not  to  be  removed.  And  even  if  we  could  not  give 
probable  ground  for  Homer's  having  placed  the  Faro 
near  it,  the  fact  would  still  be  undeniable  from  the 
evidence  of  the  text,  and  must  be  recognized  in  any 
transcript  of  the  Outer  Geography  which  we  may 
attempt. 

The  island  of  Calypso,  again,  must  be  in  the  north : 


THE  GEOGRAPHY  OF  HOMER. 


48T 


(a)  From  the  direction  taken,  as  we  have  seen,  by- 
Hermes. 

(K)  Because  fire  is  kept  burning  there,  which  indi- 
cates a  climate  requiring  it.  Kirk&  has  none  in  her 
island.1 

(c)  Because  it  is  the  omphalos,2  or  central  point 
of  a  vast  sea,  spreading  on  all  sides,  with  which  nothing 
to  the  east,  west,  or  south  of  Greece  corresponds 
either  in  nature,  or  in  the  ideas  of  Homer. 

(d)  Because  the  meaning  of  her  name,  the  Concealer, 
and  the  length  of  the  voyage  back  to  Scherie,  indicate 
her  dwelling  as  belonging  to  a  region  wholly  untrav- 
elled  and  unknown  to  the  Greeks. 

(e)  Because  Odysseus3  is  apparently  carried  to  it 
by  Notos.  And  the  general  rule  of  the  Wanderings  is, 
that  southerly  winds  bear  Odysseus  away  from  home, 
while  northerly  ones  carry  him  towards  it. 

Again,  the  association  of  Calypso  with  the  Eastern 
mythology  prevents  us  from  placing  her  in  the  North- 
west, where  lies  the  country  of  the  Laistrugones ;  and 
keeps  her  in  relation  with  the  east  rather  than  the 
west  of  North. 

The  island  of  Aiaie  is  bound  to  an  eastward  position 
by  the  name  and  character  of  Kirke  ;  by  its  relation 
to  Aietes,  and  thus  to  Jason,  and  his  voyage ;  by  the 
names  of  Helios,  the  father  of  Calypso,  and  of  her 
mother  Perse,  an  appellation  savoring,  in  Homer,  of 
the  far  East,  to  which  the  Persians  of  that  day  be- 
longed ; 4  by  its  being  the  point  of  Sunrise ;  and  by  the 
residence  of  Dawn. 

1  Od.  v.  60  ;  x.  210  seqq.  2  Od.  i.  50. 

3  Od.  xii.  426,  447. 

4  Rawlinson,  Anc.  Monarchies,  vol.  iv.  p.  349. 


488 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


All  particular  conjecture  respecting  any  position  for 
these  islands  is,  however,  vague  :  the  several  points  of 
the  scheme  of  Homer  in  the  Outer  Geography  were 
determined  by  relation  to  each  other  broadly  conceived, 
and  by  directions  generally  taken,  rather  than  by  any 
attempt  at  exactitude  even  in  mental  measurement. 

With  these  data,  I  now  proceed  to  note  the  several 
stages  of  the  Yoyage  of  Odysseus. 

1.  From  Troy  to  the  Kikones  on  the  north  coast  of 
the  iEgean  ;  in  a  region  strictly  belonging  to  the  Inner 
Geography.1 

2.  From  the  Kikones,  Boreas  (N.N.E.  wind)  carries 
Odysseus  to  Cape  Malea,  prevents  him  from  rounding 
it,  and  drives  him  out  to  sea,  where  nine  days  of  bad  or 
plaguy  winds  (olooi  anemoi)  bring  him  to  the  land 
of  the  Lotos-Eaters,  which  appears  to  be  like  an  Egypt 
in  a  new  dress.  As  five  days2  drive  a  ship  from  Crete 
to  Egypt,  we  must  suppose  that  nine  imply  some  con- 
s/deraole  westing,  and  place  the  Lotos-Eaters  on  the 
African  coast  along  the  Syrtis  Major.  We  are  now  in 
the  Outer  Sphere.3 

3.  From  the  Lotophagoi  to  the  Kuklopes,  we  have 
no  direct  guide  afforded  by  the  text,  except  that  it  was 
a  voyage  onward,  and  that  the  Kuklopes  live  on  a  main- 
land,4 not  an  island.  From  this  mainland  they  had,  at 
an  earlier  date,  displaced  their  neighbors  the  Phaiakes, 
who,  being  a  nautical  people,  passed  over  and  settled 
in  Scherie.  Therefore  we  are  probably  to  place  them 
in  Iapugia,  the  heel  of  Italy,  over  against  Scherie.5 

4.  From  the  land  of  the  Kuklopes,  perhaps  called  by 

1  Od.  ix.  39.  2  Od.  xiv.  253.  3  Od.  ix.  67,  80-84. 

4  Od.  vi.  4-8.  5  Od.  ix.  105. 


THE  GEOGRAPHY  OF  HOMER. 


489 


Homer  Hupereie,1  Odysseus  proceeds  to  the  island 
Alolie,2  and  Aiolos  gives  him  a  Zephyr  (N..W.  wind) 
which  would  carry  him  home  to  Ithaca.  Therefore  the 
island  of  Aiolos  (whether  related  to  Stromboli  as  its 
prototype  or  not)  lies  to  the  north  and  west  of  Ithaca, 
with  a  clear  sea-passage  between.3  Then  a  tempest 
drives  him  back  to  Aiolie,  after  nine  days  of  Zephuros, 
and  when  the  ships  were  in  full  sight  of  Ithaca.4 
Thus  we  have  a  very  good  measurement  from  the  direct 
evidence  of  the  text :  and  Aiolie  lies  at  sea  and  at  from 
eight  hundred  to  a  thousand  miles  from  Ithaca,  in  a 
north-westerly  direction. 

5.  From  Aiolie,  Odysseus  comes,  in  seven  days  of 
rowing,  to  Laistrugonie,  the  city  of  Lamos,  evidently 
far  north,  as  it  is  the  land  where  one  day  runs  into  an- 
other.5 We  are  now  seventeen  days  from  Ithaca  in  a 
direction  north  and  west.  There  can  be  little  doubt 
that  the  prototype  of  this  place  was  supplied  by  a  tra- 
dition brought  from  the  north-western  main.  Tire  very 
marked  description  of  the  harbor,  and  the  epithet 
(aipu)  applied  to  the  city,  correspond  closely,  I  am 
told,  with  one  or  more  of  those  on  the  south  Devon- 
shire and  south  Cornish  coasts.  But  the  site  in  the 
open  sea,  and  the  description  of  the  continuous  day? 
might  more  properly  be  taken  from  the  Faro  Islands. 
The  size  of  the  people,  especially  of  the  women6,  sug- 
gests a  Scandinavian  race ;  the  want  of  cultivation7  a 
position  in  the  far  north,  and  with  a  climate  suited  for 
pasture,  not  for  tillage. 

6.  From  Laistrugonie  we  pass,  without  indication,  to 

1  Od.  vi.  4.  2  Od.  ix.  565 ;  x.  1.  3  od.  x.  25,  46. 

4  Od.  x.  28,  54.       5  Od.  x.  80-83.  6  Od.  x.  113. 

1  Od.  x.  98. 


490 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI . 


Aiaie.1  I  have  already  shown  that  this  island  is  abso- 
lutely fixed,  according  to  the  mind  of  Homer,  in  the 
East,  as  Aiolie  is  in  the  West.  It  cannot  be  in  the  re- 
mote North,  because  no  fire  is  used.  It  is  not  very 
likely  to  lie  to  the  south  of  East,  because  of  the  neigh- 
borhood of  Kimmerian  fog.  This  is  a  difficulty  for 
Homer,  since  his  Dawn  ought  to.be  somewhat  to  the 
south  of  East.  He  tries  (it  may  seem)  to  escape,  like 
some  of  his  Trojan  heroes,  in  a  fog ;  for  he  declares 
that,  on  arriving  here,  Odysseus  could  make  out  noth- 
ing about  his  position  relatively  to  the  Dark  and  the 
Dawn,  the  Sunset  and  the  Sunrise.2  This  difficulty  of 
course  cannot  wholly  be  removed  :  but  it  rather  bears 
upon  latitudes,  than  on  longitude  or  distance  east- 
wards. I  place  Aiai£  at  a  spot  near  the  Colchis  of 
Aietes  ;  adding  that  we  are  by  no  means  to  assert  pos- 
itively that  the  island  lies  to  the  northward  of  East, 
even  though  the  balance  of  evidence  may  lie  in  that 
direction. 

From  Aiaie,  one  day's  favoring  wind  takes  Odysseus 
to  the  Ocean-mouth,  hard  by  the  Kimmerian  darkness.3 
It  is  Boreas  that  carries  him  southward,  or  up  the 
stream,  it  is  hard  to  say  which.4  After  landing,  the 
party  pursue  the  course  of  the  shore,  in  the  same  di- 
rection, to  the  entrance  of  the  Underworld ;  we  know 
not  at  what  distance.  Thence  they  return  to  Aiaie. 
No  fresh  indication  is  given. 

7.  From  Aiaie  to  the  Island  of  the  Sirens.  No  spe- 
cific indication  is  afforded  us  ;  except  that  apparently 
the  passage  is  a  short  one.  We  are  now  within  the 
virtual  limits  of  the  eastern  and  southern  Euxine.5 


i  Od.  x.  133-135.  2  Od.  x.  189-192. 

3  Od.  xi.  1-19.  4  Od.  x.  507. 

5  Od.  xii.  149-154,  165-167  ;  also  39,  and  xxiii.  326. 


THE  GEOGRAPHY  OP  HOMER. 


491 


8.  From  the  Sirens,  by  Scylla  and  Charybdis,  leav- 
ing the  (neighboring)  Planctai  aside,  to  Thrinakie. 
This  evidently  is  also  a  short  passage.1  Odysseus  is 
here  detained  by  Notos  (S.S.W.)  chiefly,  but  also  by 
Euros  ;  both  of  them  blowing  from  the  southern  hemi- 
sphere. 

9.  From  Thrinakie,  Notos  having  ceased  to  blow,  he 
is  able  to  pursue  the  homeward  route.  The  ship  found- 
ers in  a  violent  gale  from  the  North-west.2  Notos  car- 
ries him  back  in  one  night  to  Scylla  and  Charybdis, 
which  he  traverses  in  safety 3  after  great  peril ;  and 
then,  drifting  on,  apparently  with  the  same  wind,  he 
reaches,  on  the  tenth  day,  Ogugie,  the  Island  of  Ca- 
lypso, the  quasi-central  point  of  the  great  (northern) 
sea.4 

10.  From  Ogugi&  to  Scherie  ;  never  called  an  island, 
but  called  the  land  of  the  Phaiakes,  which  may  be  on 
account  of  its  size,  for  the  Poet  appears  to  have  con- 
sidered it  as  an  island.5  This  is  a  raft  voyage,  and  the 
eighteenth  day  brings  him  within  view  of  Scherie. 
Then  comes  the  storm,  with  a  hurricane  of  all  the 
winds.6  The  raft  founders  ; 7  and  Odysseus  drifts,  with 
a  wind  (Boreas)  sent  by  AtlienS,  to  Scherie,  where  he 
arrives  on  the  third  day.8 

In  this  passage  he  is  ordered  to  observe  the  stars, 
and  to  steer  with  Arctos  looking  over  against,  or  oppo- 
site, his  left ; 9  that  is  to  say,  on  his  right.  The  exact 
phrase  used  is  not  a  common  one  in  Homer,  and  it  has 

1  Od.  xii.  201,  261,  262 ;  xi.  166,  167 ;  xxiii.  327-329. 

2  Od.  xii.  403.  3  od.  xii.  424,  427-430,  442-446.  . 
*  Od.  xii.  447,  448  ;  xxiii.  333  ;  i.  50.  5  Od.  vi.  204. 

6  Od.  v.  263,  278,  293,  331,  345.  1  Od.  v.  370. 

8  Od.  v.  382-398,  •  9  Od.  v.  277. 


492 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


usually  been  translated  '  on  his  left.'  If  this  were 
correct,  the  island  of  Calypso  must  lie  in  the  north-west. 
This  would  not  so  well  agree  with  the  winds  indicated, 
though  not  expressed  ;  namely,  Boreas  for  the  passage 
home,  and  Notos  for  the  passage  from  the  Bosphorus  to 
Ogugie.  Nor  would  it  agree  as  well  with  the  time 
allowed  for  reaching  Ogugie  from  the  Bosphorus.  Be- 
sides, we  have  to  keep  in  mind  the  fact,  that  all  other 
associations  draw  Calypso  eastward. 

11.  From  Scherie  to  Ithaca  ;  a  passage  of  some  six- 
teen or  eighteen  hours  in  the  hawk-ship  ;  beginning 
early  in  the  day,  and  ending  before  the  next  dawn.1 

Allowing  for  the  rapidity  of  the  voyage,  it  is  plain 
that  Homer  placed  his  Scherie  farther  north  than  the 
original  Corfu,  which  may  be  eighty  miles  from  Ithaca. 
Eighteen  days  of  raft  voyage,  with  an  allowance  for 
the  distance  of  Scherie,  when  first  seen,  will  place 
Ogugie  at  more  than  eleven  hundred  miles  from  Ithaca. 
Ten  days  of  floatage  from  the  Bosphorus  will  give  five 
hundred  miles,  or  thereabouts,  from  that  point.  We 
have  already  found  that  Laistrugoni£  is  near  seven- 
teen hundred  miles  from  Ithaca.  All  these  routes  are 
over  the  open  sea.  Speaking  generally,  Homer  gives  to 
the  voyage  of  Odysseus  all  the  world  he  knows  of, 
lying  from  South,  round  by  West  and  North,  and  then 
far  to  the  East  of  Greece ;  except  only  what  in  terms 
of  slight  outline  he  gives  to  the  tour  of  Menelaos, 
between  the  East  and  South.2  The  two  routes  diverge 
at  the  Malean  promontory.3  Perhaps  it  is  because  the 
real  Phoenicia  lies  on  the  border  of  the  Outer  world,  in 


i  Od.  xiii.  18,  78,  86,  93-95. 
8  Od.  iii.  318. 


2  Od.  iv.  80-85. 


THE  GEOGRAPHY  OP  HOMER. 


493 


the  south,  that  he  has  given  us  an  idealized  Phoenician 
people  upon  the  border-line  towards  the  north,  and  the 
name  Scherie  is  possibly  Suri£  (Syria),  travestied  for 
the  ear,  as  the  Phaiakes  are  the  Phoinikes. 

The  general  arrangements  of  Homer  show  that  he 
thought  the  Earth  and  Sea  had  a  great  extension  north- 
wards, but  give  no  idea  of  great  distances  in  the  longi- 
tudinal line,  or  from  east  to  west.  How  far  he  carried 
it  to  the  south,  we  have  no  means  of  judging.  We 
know  that  the  Shield  of  Achilles  represented  the  form 
of  the  Earth,  with  the  River  Okeanos  for  its  rim.1 
Now  a  shield  in  general  is  sometimes  compared  with 
the  moon  by  Homer ; 2  but  he  does  not  say  the  full  moon : 
and  the  prevailing  epithets  for  the  shield  would  tend  to 
show  an  oval  form,  or  one  adapted  to  cover  the  entire 
figure  ;3  the  same  form  as  that  indicated  in  the  formula 
of  the  Spartan  mother  for  a  soldier  son  :  '  bring  it,  or  be 
brought  upon  it.'  The  natural  shape  of  the  hide,  of 
which  the  name  is  often  applied  to  a  shield,  likewise 
seems  to  favor  this  belief.  And  such  a  form  of  the 
shield  apparently  agrees  with  the  figure  which  the  de- 
scriptions of  the  Outer  Geography  tend  to  give  to  the 
Earth,  in  conjunction  with  the  representation  of  the 
Shield  of  Achilles. 

The  noble  conception  of  a  great  circumfluent  River 
was  probably  founded  on  a  combination  of  a  double  set 
of  reports ;  the  one,  of  great  currents  setting  into  the 
Thalassa,  or  Mediterranean  Sea,  and  seeming  to  feed 
it,  such  as  those  of  Yenikal£,  the  Bosphorus,  Gibraltar ; 
the  other,  of  Outer  Waters,  such  as  the  Caspian,  the 
Persian  Gulf,  and  probably  the. Red  Sea. 

i  II.  xviii.  608 ;  II.  xix.  374.  2  II.  xix.  374. 

^  II.  xi.  32 ;  xv.  646  ;  and  xiii.  130. 


494 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


The  name  Kimmeria  is  derived  by*  some  from  the 
Arabic  kahm,  black;  Maiotis  from  maneth,  meaning 
death  ;x  and  Tartarosis  taken  to  be  the  reduplication 
of  the  tar  in  tarik,  the  Persian  word  for  darkness.  The 
seeming  contradiction  of  perpetual  light  and  perpetual 
darkness  in  the  north  is  of  course  removed  for  us,  who 
know  that  both  reports  are  true, but  for  different  seasons 
of  the  year. 

1  Welsford  on  the  English  Language,  pp.  75,  76,  88.  Bleek,  Per- 
sian Vocab.  (Grammar,  p.  170). 


CHAPTER  XIV. 


Plots,  Characters,  and  Similes. 

Section  I.    The  Plots  of  the  Poems;  especially  of  the 

Iliad. 

The  works  of  Homer  are  not  constructed  upon 
speculative  models.  His  is  the  fresco  painting  of 
poetry.  He  is  a  man  singing  to  men,  and  to  men 
immensely  his  inferiors.  He  is  perhaps  more  under  the 
conditions  of  the  orator,  than  of  the  modern  poet.  He 
cannot  store  up  or  record  his  thought ;  there  is  but  one 
depository  for  it,  upon  the  living  tablets  of  the  heart, 
and  within  its  deep  recesses.  Hence,  in  both  the  Iliad 
and  the  Odyssey,  we  have  that  rush  and  exuberance  of 
life,  which  result  from  the  common  action  between  the 
Bard  and  his  hearers,  the  separate  currents  of  whose 
existences  seem  to  be  thrown  into  one  great  volume, 
never  exhausted,  though  gently  slackened  from'  time 
to  time  to  meet  the  conditions  of  our  nature. 

He  is  also  an  artist,  living  by  his  art ;  addressing 
himself  by  his  genius  to  universal  nature,  but  by  his 
circumstances  to  his  country,  and  to  the  several  squares 
of  that  tessellated  nation,  each  with  its  local  patriotism 
and  limited  traditions,  as  well  as  with  its  portion  in 
the  common  inheritance  of  Hellenism. 


496 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


Viewed  in  the  light  of  considerations  snch  as  these, 
the  plot  of  the  Odyssey  is  simple,  without  knots  or 
breaks  of  texture,  and  generally  well-devised  if  not 
uniformly  sustained  ;  but  that  of  the  Iliad  is,  as  far  as 
I  may  presume  to  judge,  in  the  main  a  consummate 
work  of  art.  The  mechanism  is  double  throughout. 
But  the  train  of  action  on  Olympos  never  clashes  with 
that  in  Troas,  and  nowhere  impairs  the  free,  natural, 
and  thoroughly  human  character  of  that  part  of  the 
business,  which  is  in  the  hands  of  mortals.  At  the 
same  time,  it  is  so  contrived  as  to  assist  the  Poet  in 
overcoming  one  of  his  greatest  difficulties  ;  which  was, 
to  maintain  a  clear  and  ample  martial  superiority  on 
the  part  of  the  Greek  chieftains,  and  yet  to  give  them 
in  Troy  a  thoroughly  worthy  and  sufficient  object  for 
their  prowess.  What  in  this  respect  was  lacking  in  the 
Trojan  leaders,  has  been  supplied  by  the  Theotechny, 
or  divine  movement  of  the  Poem. 
»  The  most  favorite  topic  of  objectors  to  the  plot  of 

the  Iliad  has  been  the  length  of  time  during  which 
Achilles  is  kept  out  of  sight.  From  the  Second  to  the 
Eighth  Book  inclusive,  and  again  from  the  Twelfth  to 
the  Fifteenth,  he  does  not  appear  upon  the  stage. 

Now  it  is  by  this  withdrawal  of  Achilles  that  Homer 
obtains  scope  for  his  other  heroes,  who  were  dwarfed 
by  the  presence  of  that  colossal  figure.  The  moment 
he  appears  they  become  insignificant;  they  are  almost 
invisible  in  the  blaze  of  his  light.  ■  But,  by  means  of  his 
absence,  Diomed,  Ajax,  Agamemnon,  Idomeneus,  and 
likewise  Odysseus  in  the  Doloneia,  and  Menelaos  in  the 
Seventeenth  Book  as  well  as  in  the  Third,  have  each 
their  opportunities  of  distinction.  In  this  manner  a 
double  object  is  gained.    First,  satisfaction  is  given  to 


PLOTS,  CHARACTERS,  AND  SIMILES.  497 


the  local  sentiment  of  the  parts  of  Greece,  with  which 
these  heroes  are  severally  connected.  In  the  second 
place,  by  this  series  of  personages,  embodying  the  idea 
and  practice  of  martial  prowess  as  it  was  commonly 
understood,  Homer  constructs,  as  it  were,  a  platform, 
on  and  from  which  he  can  build  upwards  the  astonish- 
ing figure  of  his  Achilles,  for  which  the  reader  has  been 
prepared  by  a  propaideia,  or  preliminary  course  of  great- 
ness, on  the  scale  on  which  it  commonly  (as  far  as  it  is 
common  at  all)  appears  among  men. 

But  perhaps  the  most  emphatic  confutation  of  such 
objections  is  to  be  found  in  the  total  failure  of  all 
attempts  to  combine  the  ideas  of  the  objectors  into 
anything  like  one  positive  sense  or  view,  or  to  improve 
the  Iliad  by  the  process  of  excision.  While  this  nega- 
tive criticism  treads  its  hopeless  and  dreary  circle  of 
doubt  without  progress  or  achievement,  the  Poem  itself 
confirms  and  enlarges,  from  generation  to  generation, 
its  hold  upon  civilized  mankind ;  and"  the  translations 
in  which  it  is  (of  necessity  so  imperfectly)  represented, 
but  which  carry  it  beyond  the  limited  circle  of  Greek 
scholarship,  multiply  in  this  nineteenth  century  of  ours, 
and  in  the  very  focus  of  its  keenest  activity,  at  a  rate 
beyond  all  precedent. 

The  main  steps  of  the  action  of  the  Iliad  seem  to  be 
these.  Upon  the  Wrong  perpetrated  by  Agamemnon 
arises  the  Wrath,  and  thereupon  the  Secession,  of  the 
prime  hero,  in  whose  marvellous  character  the  Greek 
nationality  is  to  find  its  supreme  satisfaction.  And 
this  character,  not  the  fate  of  Troy,  is  the  true  central 
thread  of  the  great  epic.  On  the  absence  of  Achilles, 
the  Greeks,  after  a  panic  and  recovery,  decide  upon 
doing  as  well  as  they  can  without  him.    Though  their 

32 


498 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


superior  prowess  is  fully  maintained,  they  are  losers  on 
the  whole  ;  and  they  seek  the  aid  of  a  rampart,  which 
previously  they  had  disdained.  Here  is  the  first  marked 
triumph  of  the  Wrath.  Driven  back  upon  their  works, 
they  are  themselves  threatened  with  a  siege.  The  in- 
firm spirit  of  Agamemnon  gives  way,  and  he  a  second 
time  utters  counsels  of  flight,  to  which  the  chivalrous 
spirit  of  the  other  chiefs  will  not  submit.  A  mission 
to  the  tent  of  Achilles  is  substituted,  offering  splendid 
gifts  and  the  maid  Briseis  ;  a  reparation  morally  imper- 
fect, for  there  is  no  confession  of  the  wrong.  To  the 
inflamed  and  inexorable  spirit  o*f  Achilles  they  afford 
matter  for  fresh  exasperation,  and  the  Envoys  return 
baffled  in  their  aim.  Here  is  the  second  triumph  of 
the  Wrath.  Not  till  the  ships  are  about  to  burn,  will 
he  entertain  the  thought  to  interfere. 

The  Greeks  fight  again ;  and,  a  second  time,  with 
martial  superiority,  yet  with  an  unfavorable  issue.  The 
rampart  is  broken  by  the  brave  Sarpedon,  a  chief  be  it 
remarked  of  Greek  associations,  and  apparently  the 
best  warrior  fighting  on  the  side  of  Troy.  Fire  reaches 
the  fleet.  But  Achilles  does  not  go  forth.  In  his  tow- 
ering pride,  he  will  even  now  only  send  Patroclos,  a 
semblance  of  himself;  and  this,  too,  with  the  vindictive 
wish  that  they  two,  all  else  having  perished,  may  alone 
dash  down  the  sacred  battlements  of  Troy.1 

This,  the  third  great  triumph  of  the  Wrath,  seems 
also  to  mark  the  point  of  its  overflow  into  excess  ;  and 
the  moral2  order  must  avenge  itself,  in  the  divine 
decrees,  and  through  the  persons  of  men.    By  divine 

1  II.  xvi.  97-100. 

2  See  a  fuller  discussion  on  the  Plots  of  the  two  Poems  in  Studies 
on  Homer,  vol.  iii.    Aoidos,  Sect.-  5. 


PLOTS,  CHARACTERS,  AND  SIMILES.  499 

intervention,  after  acts  of  might  unsurpassed  by  the 
other  chiefs,  Patroclos  is  slain,  and  Achilles  receives  a 
punishment,  in  recesses  of  his  nature  more  profound 
even  than  those  penetrated  and  possessed  by  the  Wrath ; 
those  recesses,  wherein  dwelt  his  intense  affection  for 
his  friend.  That  which  was  to  have  been  the  last  tri- 
umph of  his  wounded  pride,  namely,  that  not  he  but 
his  deputy  should  repel  the  attack  which  all  the  other 
chiefs  had  failed  to  baffle,  now  becomes  the  cause  of  an 
agony  so  intense,  as  by  far  to  surpass,  both  in  duration 
and  in  intensity,  the  emotions  he  had  suffered  from 
anger. 

The  remainder  of  the  fiery  current,  thus  diverted 
from  the  Greeks,  he  turns  upon  the  Trojans.  When 
he  goes  forth  as  a  warrior,  we  seem  to  feel  as  if  we  had 
*  seen  or  heard  of  no  warriors  before.  The  King  repents, 
and  makes  restitution.  Hector  is  slain.  The  Greeks 
have  been  punished  for  the  wrong  which  they  did,  or 
allowed.  Achilles  has  been  punished  for  allowing  in- 
dignation to  degenerate  into  revenge.  The  mutilation 
and  dishonoring  of  the  body  of  his  slain  antagonist 
now  became  to  him  a  second  idol,  stirring  the  great 
deep  of  his  passions,  and  bewildering  his  mind.  Thus, 
in  paying  off  his  old  debt  to  the  eternal  laws,  he  has 
already  contracted  a  new  one.  Again,  then,  his  proud 
will  must  be  taught  to  bow.  Hence,  as  Mr.  Penn  has 
well  shown,1  the  necessity  of  the  Twenty-fourth  Book, 
with  its  beautiful  machinery. 

On  the  other  side,  the  death  of  Hector  opens  the 
way  for  the  retribution  due  to  the  great  guilt  of  Troy. 
The  recovery  of  his  remains  is  a  tribute  to  his  personal 

1  Primary  Argument  of  the  Iliad,  pp.  241-273. 


500 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


piety ;  and,  after  the  fierce  excitement  of  the  action  of 
the  Poem,  sheds  a  softened  light  upon  its  close.  If  the 
plot  of  the  Iliad  is  to  be  condemned,  where  is  the  epic 
that  can  claim  either  admiration  or  acquittal  ? 

Section  II.  Some  Characters1  of  the  Poems. 
1.  Achilles. 

The  character  of  Achilles,  as  I  view  it,  differs  from 
that  of  all  other  heroes  of  poetry  and  romance  in  these 
respects :  it  is  more  intense ;  it  is  more  colossal  in 
i  scale  ;  it  ranges  over  a  wider  compass,  from  the  bor- 
ders of  savagery  to  the  most  tender  emotions  and  the 
most  delicate  refinements.  Yet  all  its  parts  are  so 
accurately  graduated,  and  so  nicely  interwoven,  that 
the  whole  tissue  is  perfectly  consistent  with  itself. 

The  self-government  of  such  a  character  is  indeed 
very  partial.  But  any  degree  of  self-government  is  a 
wonder,  when  we  consider  over  what  volcanic  forces  it 
is  exercised.  It  is  a  constantly  recurring  effort  at  rule 
over  a  constantly  recurring  rebellion  ;  and  there  is  a 
noble  contrast  between  the  strain  put  upon  his  strength, 
in  order  to  suppress  his  own  passion,  and  the  masterful 
ease  with  which  he  prostrates  all  his  enemies  in  the 
field.  The  command,  always  in  danger,  is  never  wholly 
lost.  It  is  commonly  re-established  by  a  supreme  and 
desperate  struggle  ;  and  sometimes,  as  in  the  first  As- 
sembly after  the  intervention  of  Athene^2  we  see  the 

1  The  reader  should,  on  the  Greek  characters  of  Homer,  consult 
Col.  Mure's  History  of  Greek  Literature,  vol.  i. 

2  II.  i.  219-346. 


PLOTS,  CHARACTERS,  AND  SIMILES.  501 

tide  of  passion  flowing  to  a  point  at  which  it  resembles 
a  horse  that  has  gained  its  utmost  speed,  yet  remains 
under  the  full  control  of  its  rider. 

Ferocity  is  an  element  in  his  character,  but  is  not 
its  base.  It  is  always  grounded  in,  and  springing 
from,  some  deeper  sentiment,  of  which  it  is  the  mani- 
festation. His  ferocity  towards  the  Greeks  grows  out 
of  the  intensity  of  his  indignation  at  the  foul  wrong 
done,  with  every  heightening  circumstance  of  outward 
insult,  not  merely  to  him,  but  in  his  person  to  every 
principle  of  honor,  right,  and  justice,  in  the  matter  of 
Briseis ;  as  well  as  to  the  real  attachment  he  felt  for 
her.  His  ferocity  towards  Hector  is  the  counterpart 
and  recoil  of  the  intensity  of  his  passionate  love  for 
the  dead  Patroclos. 

Magnitude,  grandeur,  majesty,  form  the  framework 
on  which  Homer  has  projected  the  character  of  Achilles. 
And  these  are  in  their  truest  forms  ;  those  forms  which 
contract  to  touch  the  smaller,  as  they  expand  to  grasp 
the  greater  things.  The  scope  of  this  character  is  like 
the  sweep  of  an  organ  over  the  whole  gamut,  from  the 
lowest  bass  to  the  highest  treble,  with  all  its  diversities 
of  tone  and  force  as  well  as  pitch.  From  the  fury  of 
the  first  Assembly,  he  calms  down  to  receive  with 
courtesy  the  pursuivants  who  demand  Briseis.  From 
the  gentle  pleasure  of  the  lyre,  he  kindles  into  the 
stern  excitement  of  the  magnificent  Debate  of  the 
Ninth  Book.  From  his  terrible  vengeance  against  the 
torn  limbs  of  Hector  he  melts  into  tears,  at  the  view 
and  the  discourse  of  Priam.  The  sea,  that  home  of 
marvels,  presents  no  wider,  no  grander  contrasts,  nor 
offers  us  an  image  more  perfect  according  to  its  kind 
in  each  of  its  varying  moods.  Foils,  too,  are  employed 


502 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


with  skill  to  exalt  the  hero.  The  half-animated  bulk 
and  strength  of  Ajax  (who  was  also  greatly  beautiful)  1 
exhibit  to  us  the  mere  clay  of  Achilles,  without  the 
vivifying  fire.  The  beauty  of  Nireus,2  wedded  to 
effeminacy,  sets  off  the  transcendent,  and  yet  manful 
and  heroic,  beauty  of  Achilles  ;  and  the  very  orna- 
ments of  gold,  which  in  Nastes  the  Carian3  only  sug- 
gest Asiatic  luxury  and  relaxation,  when  they  are  borne 
on  the  person  of  the  great  Achaian  hero,  seem  but  a 
new  form  of  tribute  to  his  glorious  manhood. 


The  high  quality  of  Homer's  portraitures  is  in  no 
way  better  apprehended,  than  by  the  clearness  of  the 
distinctions  between  the  personages  who  most  approxi- 
mate. Odysseus  receives  in  the  Odyssey  a  develop- 
ment, which  raises  him,  as  a  protagonist,  almost  to  the 
level  of  Achilles ;  but  in  the  Iliad,  while  he  is  sepa- 
rated from  Nestor  by  some  twenty  years  of  juniority, 
these  two  characters  bear  a  resemblance  which  some 
might  mistake  for  repetition.  But,  in  truth,  they  are 
radically  distinct,  both  in  speech  and  action.  Nestor's 
eloquence  is  gentle  and  flowing,  with  a  decided  flavor 
of  egotism  and  of  garrulity.  That  of  Odysseus  is  mas- 
culine and  compressed :  when  he  refers  to  himself,  it 
is  only  to  enhance  his  own  obligation,  in  a  great 
crisis,  to  act  as  it  demands  ;4  and  he  never  wastes  a 
word.  The  sagacity  of  Nestor  is  addressed  to  ques- 
tions where  calm  judgment,  and  the  weight  given  by 
age  and  great  experience,  are  alone  required ;  the 


2.  Odysseus. 


i  Od.  xi.  469. 
3  II.  ii.  872. 


2  II.  ii.  671. 

4  II.  ii.  259-264. 


PLOTS,  CHARACTERS,  AND  SIMILES.  503 

interpositions  of  Odysseus  are  in  cases,  where  vehe- 
ment impulses  and  strong  passions  are  to  be  encoun- 
tered, and  where  the  presence  of  mind,  which  can  face 
a  crisis,  is  indispensable.  He  checks  and  recalls  the 
whole  army  from  its  tumultuous  rush  homewards ; 
he  undertakes  the  burden  of  the  remonstrance  and  peti- 
tion to  Achilles.  But  the  interposition  of  Nestor,  in  the 
great  Debate  of  the  First  Book,  is  only  employed  by 
the  Poet  when  the  matter  has  already,  by  the  direct 
interposition  of  AthenS,  been  reduced  to  an  issue  of 
words  alone.  To  untie  a  knot  is  the  office  of  Nestor ; 
to  stem  a  torrent,  or  scale  a  frowning  barrier,  is  the 
business  of  Odysseus.  Again,  and  more  generally, 
Nestor  heals  differences  by  a  soothing  interposition, 
and  offers  suggestions :  Odysseus  constructs  wider 
plans,  but  the  specialty  of  his  case  is  this,  that  he 
executes  what  he  designs.  He  has  touched  that  period 
of  life  when  the  faculties  of  the  mind  are  fully 
ripened,  and  the  bodily  powers  are  consolidated,  but 
not  yet  decayed.  Nestor  belongs  to  one  more  ad- 
vanced ;  when  the  mind,  without  acquiring  vigor,  in 
the  main  retains  it,  but  when  the  province  of  bodily 
action  is  narrowed  by  comparative  infirmity,  and  the 
person  becomes  as  it  were  a  head  without  a  hand,  a 
dependent  instead  of  a  self-subsistent  organism. 

The  character  of  Odysseus,  as  a  whole,  is  admirably 
balanced  between  daring  and  prudence,  both  of  which 
are  carried  in  him  to  the  highest  degree.  The  picture 
is  showever  diversified  by  two  occasions,  on  each  of 
which  he  records  his  having  failed  in  his  usual  cir- 
cumspection. On  visiting  the  cave  of  Poluphemos,  his 
companions  advise  him  to  be  content  with  carrying 
off  a  supply  of  cheese,  and  retiring  ;  but  he  determines 


504 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


to  remain  and  see  the  monster.1  And  after  the  escape 
from  the  cave  and  the  re-embarkation,  while  his  men 
try  to  keep  him  quiet,  he  persists  in  exasperating  the 
Cyclops  with  his  stinging  addresses.2  In  both  these 
cases  we  may  discern  a  fault ;  yet  not  a  fault  alone, 
but  the  irresistible  aspiration  of  genius  to  measure  it- 
self with  danger,  and  to  pierce  boldly  into  the  unknown. 

Odysseus  is  represented  as  somewhat  wanting  in  one 
element  of  the  beauty  of  the  Homeric  hero  ;  namely, 
amplitude  of  stature.  Menelaos  is  taller  by  the  head 
and  shoulders ; 3  and  the  Cyclops  despise  him  for  his 
deficiency  in  height.4  But  that  his  frame  was  other- 
wise well  developed  and  powerful  is  manifest,  as  he 
was  more  majestic  than  Menelaos  when  they  sate 
down;5  and  also  from  his  wrestling  on  equal  terms 
with  the  huge  Ajax,6  and  from  his  extraordinary  feats 
of  strength  and  endurance  in  the  Odyssey.  But  it  is 
observable  that,  amidst  the  long  list  of  epithets  be- 
stowed upon  him,  none  have  reference  to  personal 
beauty,  except  when,  in  Scherie,  Athene  had  endowed 
him  with  it  in  a  manner  which  seems  to  have  gone 
much  beyond  mere  restoration  from  his  weather-beaten 
aspect.7  He  seems  to  speak  of  himself,  even  among 
the  Phaiakes,  as  not  possessed  of  this  special  gift  equally 
with  them.8  On  the  other  hand,  we  ought  perhaps  to 
set  the  attachment  of  Calypso  as  tending  in  the  opposite 
direction  ;  and  when  he  returns  to  Ithaca,  Athene*  dis- 
guises him  by  wrinkling  his  fair  flesh,  and  by  spoiling 
his  hair,  now  auburn,  but  elsewhere  hyacinthine.9 

i  Od.  ix.  224.  2  od.  ix.  492-502.        3  n.  iii.  210. 

4  Od.  ix.  515.  5  ii.  in.  211.  6  II.  xxiii.  709  seqq. 

7  Od.  vi.  227-235.        8  Od.  viii.  166-175. 
Od  vi  231  ;  xiii.  399. 


PLOTS,  CHARACTERS,  AND  SIMILES.  505 


His  age,  too,  is  of  course  to  be  taken  into  account. 
Perhaps  it  is  on  this  ground  that  Homer  may  have 
meant  to  ascribe  to  him  majesty,  rather  than  simple 
beauty,  of  countenance. 

Although  a  prudence  ever  wakeful,  and  sometimes 
leaning  towards  craft,  is  the  most  commonly  noticed 
characteristic  of  Odysseus,  and  became  in  after  ages 
the  key-note  of  the  character,  it  is  in  Homer  only  one 
of  several  features  highly  distinctive,  by  means  of  which 
the  Poet  has  raised  this  extraordinary  conception  to 
something  very  near  a  parity  of  rank  with  his  Achilles. 
Though  he  does  not  compete  with  the  son  of  Peleus  in 
his  grand  prerogatives,  in  each  one  of  them  he  is  left 
second  to  no  other  hero.  He  wrestles  with  Ajax  in 
the  Twenty-third  Iliad,  and  beats  him  in  the  contest 
for  the  Arms  of  Achilles,  thereby  establishing  for  him- 
self the  second  place  among  the  Greek  chieftains.  The 
depth  of  his  passion,  and  the  power  of  his  eloquence,  as 
they  are  exhibited  in  the  encounter  with  Eurualos,  if 
they  are  still  behind  Achilles  in  each  point,  are  before 
those  of  every  other  Greek.  But  by  way  of  compensation 
for  their  being  only  second,  Homer  has  awarded  to  him 
a  many-sidedness,  such  as  is  possessed  by  no  other 
hero.  He  is  a  master  not  only  in  war,  but  in  govern- 
ment, and  in  every  industrial  pursuit ;  and  the  sole 
approach  that  we  find  in  the  Poems  to  anything  like 
Fine  Art  from  the  hand  of  a  Greek,  is  in  the  bed1  which 
he  had  wrought.  There  is  yet  another  capacity  in  which 
Homer  has  assigned  him  a  clear  pre-eminence  ;  the  ca- 
pacity of  father  and  husband,  of  a  model  of  the  domestic 
affections.     After  an  absence  of  near  twenty  years 


l  Od.  xxiii.  195-201. 


506 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


he  is  still  yearning  for  the  day  of  escape  from  the  arms 
of  a  goddess,  that  he  may  return  to  his  wife  and  child  ; 
,  and  the  very  smoke  of  Ithaca  would  be  dear  to  his 
eyes.1  Of  the  Odyssey  this  is  the  theme.  But  the 
Iliad,  too,  sustains  by  its  slighter  indications  the  sister 
poem  ;  for  he  alone  among  the  Greek  chieftains  desires 
to  be  known  as  the  father  of  his  son ;  and  touchingly 
sets  forth  his  sense  of  the  hardship  of  being  detained, 
even  but  a  single  month,  away  from  a  wife.2 

The  faculty  of  tears  is  generally  ascribed  to  the 
Greek  chiefs  and  soldiery ;  and  the  Poet  did  not  think 
their  susceptibility  derogated  from  their  manhood.  But 
even  here  Odysseus  has  a  specialty.  This  man  of  iron 
nerve  and  soul,  who  within  the  Horse's  ribs  saved  the 
lives  of  his  comrades  by  sternly  compelling  silence ;  who 
in  the  cave  of  Poluphemos  executed  his  vengeance,  and 
then  clung  beneath  the  great  ram  as  the  blinded  monster 
felt  its  back ;  and  who  again  gave  place  to  a  profound 
and  inexorable  wrath,  not  only  against  the  Suitors,  but 
even  against  their  helpless  and  miserable  minions ; 
even  this  same  man  it  is,  who  weeps  at  the  recognition 
given  of  his  return  by  the  dog  Argos  in  his  twentieth 
year.3 

3.  Agamemnon. 

The  Agamemnon  of  Homer  is  described  as  a  good 
king  and  a  stout  warrior.  He  shows  a  natural  affection 
to  his  brother,  and  is  not  deficient  in  the  courtesy 
which,  then  as  now,  marked  his  race  ;  but  he  is  not  in 
other  respects  an  amiable,  nor  a  decidedly  estimable 
man  :  and  Homer  seems  to  take  care  that  we  shall  not 


i  Od.  i.  58. 


2  II.  ii.  260,  292. 


3  Od.  xvii.  304. 


PLOTS,  CHARACTERS,  AND  SIMILES. 


507 


love  him.  His  besetting  sin  is  personal ;  it  is  an 
avarice,  which  seems  to  make  him  both  cruel  in  war, 
with  a  view  to  spoil,  and  niggardly  in  general  conduct. 
His  marked  virtue  is  official ;  he  has  a  profound  sense 
of  responsibility  to  the  army.  To  this  responsibility  he 
greatly  defers  ;  and  though  avarice,  appetite,  and  pride, 
were  alike  gratified  in  the  acquisition  of  Chryseis,  he 
yields  her  up.1  And  a  circumstance,  disclosed  later  in 
the  Poem,  shows  us  that,  doubtless  from  motives  of 
policy,  he  did  not  assume  an  absolute  possession  of  the 
woman  he  had  taken  from  Achilles.  Yet  he  has  neither 
the  fire  of  genius,  nor  any  gift  of  profound,  political 
sagacity.  On  the  contrary,  while,  like  so  many  poli- 
ticians, he  is  a  practitioner  in  finesse,  he  contrives  by 
it  to  outwit  himself.  This  seems  to  be,  in  part  at  least, 
the  explanation  of  the  unhappy  device  in  the  Second 
Iliad,  where  he  seeks  to  provoke  the  people  to  an  attack 
on  Troy,  by  counselling  them  to  go  home  forthwith  ; 2 
which  they  would  have  done,  to  his  utter  confusion, 
unless  the  error  had  been  retrieved  by  Odysseus. 

It  is  a  remarkable  illustration  of  the  power  of  the 
Hellenic  anthropomorphism,  that  the  characters  of 
the  Olympian  and  the  Pelopid  chief  have  some  close 
resemblances.  Zeus,  wielding  the  highest  power,  is 
strong  in  the  sense  of  responsibility,  while  inferior  in 
intellect  to  some  members  of  the  group  around  him ; 
and  he  partially  redeems  the  meaner  elements  of  his 
character  by  a  strong  touch  of  natural  affection  for 
his  son  Sarpedon,  just  as  that  of  Agamemnon  is  in  a 
degree  ennobled  by  his  fraternal  love  for  Menelaos.3 
He  may  be  in  part  the  reflection  of  a  human  prototype. 


i  II.  i.  117.  2  ii.  ii.  139-145.  3  ii.  iv.  148  ;  vii.  107. 


508 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI . 


Whether  he  be  or  not,  it  is  in  great  part  true  that 
Zeus  is  the  Agamemnon  of  Olympos,  and  Agamemnon 
the  Zeus  of  Greece. 

4.  Diomed  and  Ajax. 

In  the  same  manner  the  characters  of  Ajax  and 
Diomed,  allied  by  resemblances  in  action,  are  pro- 
foundly and  broadly  distinguished.  Each  is  superlative 
in  its  degree  ;  but  while  Diomed  is  gallant,  Ajax  is 
sturdy.  Diomed  is  impassioned,  Ajax  is  calm  ;  Diomed 
is  rapid,  Ajax  is  slow.  Diomed  can  brag ;  Ajax  moves 
in  a  simple  unquestioning  self-reliance.  Diomed  is  not 
above  taking  a  circuitous  advantage,  as  we  find  when,  in 
the  act  of  fulfilling  the  duties  of  guestship,  he  makes  an 
extraordinarily  profitable  exchange  with  G-laucos  :  Ajax 
ever  goes  direct  to  his  point.  With  a  fine  discernment, 
the  Poet  selects  Ajax  and  Odysseus  as  the  envoys  to 
Achilles,  in  the  Ninth  Book,  to  attempt  a  conciliation. 
The  favorable  prepossessions  of  the  great  warrior  are 
commanded  by  his  sympathy  with  the  powerful  intellect 
of  the  one,  and  the  straightforward  simplicity  of  the 
other.  A  certain  vein  of  craft  and  of  talk  in  Diomed 
carried  him  away  from  the  type  of  the  first  without 
giving  him  the  weighty  attractions  of  the  second. 
And  it  may  also  be  observed  that,  although  Achilles 
is  in  truth  incomparable,  yet  the  combination  of  in- 
tellect and  spirit  with  activity  and  rapid  force  in 
Diomed  make  him  the  one  chieftain  of  the  Iliad,  who,  if 
any,  would  be  placed  in  a  direct  competition  with  the 
hero  of  heroes.  Hence  probably  there  was  a  latent 
estrangement.  And  hence,  probably,  Achilles  selects 
Diomed  for  the  chief  subject  of  the  matchless  passage 


PLOTS,  CHARACTERS,  AND  SIMILES.  509 

in  which,  gloating  over  the  miscarriages  of  the  Greeks, 
he  combines  bitter  taunt  with  fiery  exultation.1 

Diomed,  indeed,  possesses  every  quality  necessary  to 
make  up  a  complete  Achaian  hero.  Acute,  prompt, 
intelligent,  decided  in  mind,  daring,  constant  and  re- 
solved in  spirit,  active,  strong,  and  seemingly  resistless 
in  strength  of  body,  he  is  more  than  able  to  cope  with 
the  brute  strength  of  the  god  Ares.  Of  any  other 
poem  he  might  have  been  the  model  man.  But  even 
the  extraordinary  composition  of  his  gifts  is  artfully 
employed  by  Homer  with  a  view  to  the  greater  glory 
of  that  one  character,  which,  in  all  qualities  and  all  pro- 
portions of  intellect  and  soul  and  body,  without  devi- 
ating from  true  humanity,  is  nevertheless  colossal. 

5.  Helen. 

The  Helen  of  the  Homeric  Poems  has  been  conceived 
by  the  Poet,  himself  of  peculiar  delicacy,  with  great 
truth  of  nature,  and  evidently  with  no  intention  to 
deprive  her  of  a  share  in  the  sympathy  of  his  hearers. 
He  has  made  her  a  woman,  not  cast  in  the  mould  of 
martyrs  or  of  saints,  nor  elevated  in  her  moral  ideas  to 
a  capacity  of  comprehension,  and  of  endurance,  beyond 
her  age  ;  but  yet  endowed  with  much  tenderness  of 
feeling,  with  the  highest  grace  and  refinement,  and  with 
a  deep  and  peculiar  sense  of  shame  for  the  offence  into 
which  she  has  been  forced  or  tempted,  and  from  the 
consequences  of  which  she  is  unable  to  escape. 

In  order  justly  to  appreciate  the  character  of  the 
Homeric  Helen,  we  must  begin  by  casting  aside,  if  we 
can,  all  which  later  times  have  added,  and  which  poets 


i  II.  xvi.  74-78. 


510 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


more  widely  familiar  than  Homer  have  conveyed  into  the 
modern  mind.  That  she  was  a  willing  partner  in  the 
crime  of  Paris  at  its  inception,  we  are  not  informed  by 
the  Poems  ;  in  which,  on  the  contrary,  Paris  describes 
himself  as  having  carried  her  off  by  violence.1  We 
only  know  that  she  acquiesced  in  the  consequences  of  it, 
by  which  she  became  his  mate  through  a  series  of  years, 
and  by  which  also,  on  his  death,  like  other  widows,  she 
was  apparently  transferred  to  another  husband,  his 
brother  Deiphobos.2  In  this  no  general  baseness  or 
depravity  of  character  is  implied,  but  only  the  absence 
of  a  power  of  resistance,  which  would  have  exceeded  that 
of  Penelope,  and  would  have  been  almost  preterhuman 
at  a  period,  when  the  condition  of  a  woman  withdrawn 
from  the  regular  family  order  was  one  of  great,  nay 
total,  helplessness. 

After  the  fall  of  Troy,  Helen  resumes  her  place  in 
the  palace  of  Menelaos,  as  his  Queen.  The  subdued 
tone  of  her  character,  and  the  absence  of  self-assertion 
in  her,  are  still  observable  ;  but  by  her  husband,  and  by 
all  around  them,  she  is  treated  with  the  same  senti- 
ments, as  if  nothing  had  happened  to  break  the  original 
tenor  of  her  married  life.  Indeed  we  find  in  the 
Odyssey  a  passage,  which  seems  to  indicate  a  remark- 
able tenderness  on  the  part  of  Menelaos,  in  connection 
with  the  most  questionable  act  recorded  of  the  conduct 
of  Helen  during  the  war.  When  the  Greeks  were 
inclosed  within  the  frame  of  the  Horse,  the  Trojans, 
suspecting  the  ambush,  brought  her  down  to  the  spot, 
and  she  imitated  the  voices  of  the  wives  of  the  chief- 
tains, in  the  hope  that  they,  if  there,  would  reply.  This 


i  II.  iii.  443-444. 


2  Od.  iv.  276. 


PLOTS,  CHARACTERS,  AND  SIMILES.  511 

act,  done  against  the  Greeks,  savors  of  that  slightness 
of  character,  which  seems  to  be  represented  as  the 
source  of  her  great  error.  But  Menelaos,  when  he 
mentions  the  subject,  shifts  the  blame  from  her. 
i  Thither,'  he  says,  '  thou  earnest ;  but  no  doubt  it 
was  some  deity,  favorable  to  Troy,  that  prompted 
thee.'1 

Helen  was  the  object  of  much  reproach  in  Troy  ; 
not,  however,  from  the  mild  Priam,2  nor  from  the 
virtuous  Hector,3  but  from  Hecuba,  or  from  the  priuces 
and  princesses.  This  is  amply  to  be  accounted  for,  from 
their  natural  sense  of  the  suffering  which  by  her  means 
had  been  brought  upon  their  family  and  country,  without 
presuming  unfavorably  of  her  beyond  what  has  been 
already  stated.  But  it  could  hardly  have  been  the 
general  rule  ;  for  when  her  sister-in-law  Laodike  sum- 
mons her  to  the  Wall  in  the  Third  Iliad,  she  addresses 
her  by  the  title  of '  dear  bride.'4 

Among  the  Greeks  of  the  War,  she  is  never  made  the 
subject  of  reproach.  In  one  verse  of  the  Iliad,  Achilles 
speaks  of  her  as  that  dreadful  Helen.  But  this  is  in  the 
agony  of  his  mind  :  and  in  his  conference  with  the 
Envoys,  where  it  would  greatly  have  enhanced  the  force 
of  his  argument  if  he  could  have  represented  her  as 
worthless,  he  does  nothing  of  the  kind.5  Penelop& 
•says  of  her,  that  the  deity  impelled  her  to  do  an  evil 
deed.6  But  in  the  context  of  this  very  passage,  she 
speaks  of  Helen  simply  as  deluded,  without  any  malice 
prepense,  and  uses  the  deplorable  result  to  justify  her 
own  extraordinary  circumspection  in  the  matter  of  the 


1  Od.  iv.  274-279.  2  II.  xxiv.  770.  3  n.  xxiv.  771. 

4  II.  iii.  130.  5  11.  ix.  337.  6  od.  xxiii.  222. 


512 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


recognition  of  Odysseus.  Compare  this  with  the  words 
in  which  the  Poet  describes  the  sin  of  Clytemnestra, 
4  To  his  home  Aigisthos  led  her,  as  willing  as  him- 
self.'1 

In  truth,  Homer  awards  to  Helen,  when  in  his  own 
person  he  speaks  of  her,  an  honorable,  not  a  dishonor- 
able treatment.  The  epithets  attached  to  her  name 
are  chiefly  descriptive  of  beauty  and  birth ;  but  they 
are  never  colored  with  any  tint  of  blame.  And  when 
in  the  Odyssey  he  compares  her  to  his  Artemis,2  we  see 
on  the  positive  side  that  favorable  bias  of  his  mind, 
of  which  we  may  recognize  the  negative  side  of  the  fact 
that  he  never  once  compares  her  to  Aphrodite.  In 
truth,  the  only  censures  of  her  that  we  read  in  the 
Poems,  are  those  pronounced  by  herself. 

The  scene  between  her  and  Aphrodite  in  the  Third 
Iliad  exhibits  the  highest  aspect  of  her  character.  The 
goddess  endeavors  to  excite  her  passions,  by  a  glowing 
description  of  Paris  in  his  beauty  and  his  splendid 
garments,  and  desires  her  to  repair  to  him.  Struck  at 
first  with  fear  when  she  perceives  who  it  is  that  is 
addressing  her,  she  then  kindles  into  indignation,  and 
makes  a  bitter  and  stinging  reply ;  reproaches  Aphro- 
dite for  interfering  to  prevent  Menelaos  from  taking  her 
home,  and  bids  her  assume  to  herself  the  odious  char- 
acter she  was  seeking  to  force  on  another,  who  had  too. 
long  borne  it.  It  is  only  under  violent  threats,  that 
she  at  length  and  with  shame  complies ;  and,  on  ar- 
riving in  the  presence  of  Paris,  she  addresses  him  in 
terms  of  scorn  and  aversion.3 

Upon  the  whole,  I  think  that  no  one,  forming  his 


i  Od.  iii.  272. 


2  Od.  iv.  122. 


3  II.  iii.  390-436. 


PLOTS,  CHARACTERS,  AND  SIMILES.  513 

estimate  of  Helen  from  Homer  only,  could  fall  into  the 
gross  error  of  looking  upon  her  as  a  type  of  depraved 
character.  From  the  odious  Helen1  of  the  Second 
JEneid  she  is  immeasurably  apart.  Her  beauty,  grace, 
refinement,  are  not  contaminated  by' vicious  appetites  ; 
they  are  only  not  sustained  by  an  heroic,  almost  a 
superhuman,  firmness.  Her  fall  once  incurred,  she 
finds  herself  bound  by  the  iron  chain  of  circumstance, 
from  which  she  can  obtain  no  extrication.  But  to  the 
world,  beneath  whose  standard  of  morality  she  has 
sunk,  she  makes  at  least  this  reparation,  that  the  sharp 
condemnation  of  herself  is  ever  in  her  mouth,  and  that 
she  does  not  seek  to  throw  off  the  burden  of  her  shame 
on  her  more  guilty  partner.  Nay,  more  than  this  ;  her 
self-abasing  and  self-renouncing  humility  come  nearer, 
perhaps,  than  any  other  heathen  example,  to  the  type 
of  Christian  penitence. 

6.  Hector. 

The  character  of  the  Homeric  Hector  has  been  so 
exaggerated,  and  so  defaced,  by  the  later  tradition,  that 
it  has  lost  every  distinctive  feature  of  the  original,  and 
has  come  to  stand  as  a  symbol  of  the  highest  bravery 
and  chivalry.  But  neither  bravery  nor  chivalry  are,  in 
a  proper  sense,  distinctive  features  of  the  Homeric 
Hector. 

In  the  original  portraiture  itself,  which  is  perfectly 
simple  and  intelligible,  there  is  nothing  to  account  for 
this  change.  Hector,  in  the  Iliad,  is  a  person  of  warm 
domestic  affections,  of  upright  purpose,  of  feeble  will, 
of  considerable,  but  not  first-rate,  fighting  force  ;  with 


i  Mn.  ii.  567-587. 
33 


514 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


all  the  convictions  of  a  good  citizen,  though  without 
the  light  of  imagination  or  the  fire  of  enthusiasm. 
He  seems  to  be  born  in  a  family  of  lower  tone,  and 
weaker  fibre,  than  his  own ;  hence  upon  him  is  laid 
the  whole  burden  of  war  and  government  in  a  terrible 
crisis,  and  his  responsibilities  are  beyond  his  powers. 
Hence,  probably,  come  the  discords  of  his  character ; 
between  boastfulness,  feebleness,  and  even  shabbiness 
on  one  side,  and  fundamental  rectitude,  worth,  and 
attachment  to  virtue  on  another.  The  contrast  seems 
to  result  from  an  overstrain.  And  hence  it  may  be 
that,  though  much  looked  up  to  in  the  Poems  by  his 
own  family,  he  does  not  seem  to  enjoy  the  confidence 
or  respect  either  of  the  self-centred  iEneas,  or  of  the 
circumspect  Poludamas,1  or  even  of  the  gallant  and 
good  Sarpedon.2 

It  may  be  truly  said,  that  Hector  is  the  most  incon- 
sistent character  in  the  Iliad.  No  man  is  braver  than 
he  is  at  times :  on  the  other  hand,  no  man  shows  more 
palpable  signs  of  cowardice.  No  man  is  more  rash ; 
yet  none  has  a  deeper  presentiment  of  the  future. 
No  man  is  so  improvident,  it  might  almost  be  said  so 
insolent,  in  repelling  wise  counsel  tendered  to  him  ; 
and  yet  none  shows  more  unequivocal  signs  of  personal 
humility.  But  the  faults  in  his  character,  though 
numerous  and  glaring,  do  not  form  its  main  tissue. 
They  are  flaws  in  a  delineation  essentially  good,  and 
occasionally  noble.  No  act  of  cruelty  or  bad  faith 
or  violence,  of  greed  or  lust  or  selfishness,  associates 
itself  with  his  character ;  the  stream  of  his  thought  is 
pure ;  the  love  he  has  for  his  country,  his  parents,  his 


i  II.  xii.  211 ;  xiii.  726. 


2  II.  v.  472  seqq. 


PLOTS,  CHARACTERS,  AND  SIMILES.  515 

wife,  his  child,  overflows  even  in  a  protective  care  for 
Helen.1  In  the  measure  open  to  his  day  and  people, 
he  is  one  who  fears  God,  and  regards  man ;  and  per- 
haps the  total  absence  of  vice,  as  it  is  contradistin- 
guished from  infirmity,  in  his  character,  co-operated 
with  other  causes  in  bringing  about  his  adoption  in  the 
Christian  literature  of  the  middle  ages,  as  the  model, 
for  the  olden  time,  of  the  heroic  man. 

But  the  very  inconsistency  of  Hector  affords  a  marked 
testimony  to  the  skill  of  the  Poet.  Had  he  been  con- 
sistently great,  he  would  have  been  a  real  rival  to  those 
prime  Achaian  chieftains,  to  whom  Homer  sought  to 
secure  an  undisputed  supremacy  of  admiration.  Had 
he  been  consistently  mean  and  small,  he  would  have 
been  a  foe  so  unworthy,  that  no  honor  could  redound 
to  them  from  overcoming  him.  One  of  these  dangers 
he  has  avoided  by  the  flaws  in  the  character  of  Hector ; 
the  other  by  his  virtues  and  his  merits.  It  is  not  easy 
to  see  by  what  other  means  he  could  effectually  have 
'attained  the  ends  of  his  art.  And  he  has  further  con- 
trived, that  the  virtues  of  Hector  shall  be  mainly  of  a 
stamp,  in  which  the  Achaian  chieftains  shall  not  be 
tempted  to  compete  with  him ;  the  affectionate  sorrow 
of  his  anticipations  of  the  future,  the  stern  rebuke  of 
an  unworthy  brother,  the  dignified  endurance  of  mis- 
fortune, and  that  form  of  resigned  heroism,  which  can 
only  be  exhibited  in  the  extremity  of  disaster. 


i  II.  xxiv.  767-772. 


516 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


7.  Paris. 

The  character  of  Paris  is  as  worthy,  as  any  other  in 
the  Poems,  of  the  powerful  hand  and  just  judgment  of 
Homer.  It  is  neither  on  the  one  hand  too  slightly,  nor 
on  the  other  too  elaborately,  drawn ;  the  touches  are 
just  such  and  so  many,  as  his  poetic  purpose  seemed 
on  the  one  hand  to  demand,  and  on  the  other  to  admit. 
Paris  is  not  indeed  the  gentleman,  but  he  is  the  fine 
gentleman,  and  the  pattern  voluptuary,  of  the  heroic 
ages ;  and  all  his  successors  in  these  capacities  may 
well  be  wished  joy  of  their  illustrious  prototype.  The 
redeeming,  or  at  least  relieving,  point  in  his  character, 
is  one  which  would  condemn  any  personage  of  higher 
intellectual  or  moral  pretensions ;  it  is  a  total  want  of 
earnestness,  the  unbroken  sway  of  levity  and  of  indif- 
ference to  all  serious  and  manly  considerations.  He 
completely  fulfils  the  idea  of  the  poco-curante^  except  as 
to  the  display  of  his  personal  beauty,  the  enjoyment  of 
luxury,  and  the  resort  to  sensuality  as  the  best  refuge, 
from  pain  and  care.  He  is  not  a  monster,  for  he  is 
neither  savage  nor  revengeful ;  but  still  further  is  he 
from  being  one  of  Homer's  heroes,  for  he  has  neither 
honor,  courage,  eloquence,  thought,  nor  prudence. 
That  he  bears  the  reproaches  of  Hector  without  irri- 
tation, is  due  to  .that  same  moral  apathy,  and  that  nar- 
rowness of  intelligence,  which  makes  him  insensible  to 
those  he  receives  from  Helen.  No  man  can  seriously 
resent  what  he  does  not  really  feel.  He  is  wholly  des- 
titute even  of  the  delicacy  and  refinement,  which 
soften  many  of  the  features  of  vice ;  and  the  sen- 
suality he  shows  in  the  Third  Book 1  partakes  largely 

i  II.  iii.  437-448. 


/ 


PLOTS,  CHARACTERS,  AND  SIMILES.  517 


of  that  brutal  character  which  marks  the  lusts  of 
Jupiter.  No  wise,  no  generous  word  ever  passes  from 
his  lips.  On  one  subject  only  he  is  determined  enough  ; 
it  is,  that  he  will  not  give  up  the  woman  whom  he  well 
knows  to  be  without  attachment  to  him,1  and  whom  he 
keeps  not  as  the  object  of  his  affections,  but  merely  as 
the  instrument  of  his  pleasures.  One  solicitude  only 
he  cherishes  :  it  is  to  decorate  his  person,  to  exhibit  his 
beauty,  to  brighten  with  care  the  arms  that  he  would 
fain  parade,  but  has  not  the  courage  to  employ  against 
the  warriors  of  Greece. 

Paris,  though  effeminate  and  apathetic,  is  not  gentle, 
either  to  his  wife  or  his  enemies ;  and,  when  he  has 
wounded  Diomed,  he  wishes  the  shot  had  been  a  fatal 
one.  The  reply  of  Diomed  cuts  deeper  than  any  arrow 
when  he  addresses  him  as 

'  Bowman  !  ribald  !  well-frizzled  girl-hunter  ! ' 2 

Again,  the  Poet  tells  us,  as  if  by  accident,  that  when, 
after  the  battle  with  Menelaos,  he  could  not  be  found, 
it  was  not  because  the  Trojans  were  unwilling  to  give 
him  up,  for  they  hated  him  with  the  hatred  which  men 
feel  to  dark  Death.3  And  again  we  learn,  how  he  uses 
bribery  to  keep  his  ground  in  the  Assembly ;  how  he 
refuses  to  recognize  even  his  own  military  inferiority, 
but  lamely  accounts  for  the  success  of  Menelaos  by 
saying  that  all  men  have  their  turn ; 4  and  how  he 
causes  shame  to  his  own  countrymen,  and  exultation 
to  the  Greeks,  when  they  contrast  the  pretensions  of 
his  splendid  appearance  with  his  miserable  perform- 
ance in  the  field.5 


i  II.  iii.  428. 
4  II.  vi.  339. 


2  II.  xi.  385. 
5  II.  iii.  43,  51. 


3  II.  iii.  454. 


518 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


The  immediate  transition,  in  the  Third  Book,  from 
the  field  of  battle,  where  he  was  disgraced,  to  the  bed 
of  luxury,  is  admirably  suited  to  impress  upon  the 
mind,  by  the  strong  contrast,  the  real  character  of 
Paris.  Nor  let  it  be  thought,  that  Homer  has  gratui- 
tously forced  upon  us  the  scene  between  him  and  his 
reluctant  partner.  It  was  just  that  he  should  mark 
as  a  bad  man  him  who  had  sinned  grossly,  selfishly, 
and  fatally,  alike  against  Greece  and  his  own  family 
and  country.  This  impression  would  not  have  been 
consistent  and  thorough  in  all  its  parts,  if  we  had  been 
even  allowed  to  suppose  that,  as  a  refined,  affectionate, 
and  tender  companion,  he  made  such  amends  to  Helen, 
as  the  case  permitted,  for  the  wrong  done  her  in  his 
hot  and  heady  youth.  Such  a  supposition  might  ex- 
cusably have  been  entertained,  and  it  would  have  bee\i 
supported  by  the  very  feebleness  of  the  character  of 
Paris,  and  by  his  part  in  the  war,  had  Homer  been 
silent  upon  the  subject.  He,  therefore,  though  with 
cautious  hand,  lifts  the  veil  so  far  as  to  show  us  that, 
in  our  variously  compounded  nature,  animal  desire 
can  use  up  and  absorb  the  strength  which  ought  to 
nerve  our  higher  faculties,  and  that,  as  none  are  more 
cruel  than  the  timid,  so  none  are  more  coarse  than  the 
effeminate. 


Section  III.    The  Similes  of  the  Poems. 

The  detailed  similes  of  the  Iliad  are  about  194  in 
number  ;  besides  near  sixty  comparisons  without  any 
detail  or  varied  ornament. 

They  are  very  unequally  distributed.  The  First 
Book  has  none ;  the  Sixth  only  one.    In  both  these 


PLOTS,  CHARACTERS,  AND  SIMILES. 


519 


the  action  is  of  highly  sustained  and  varied  interest. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  Books  occupied  exclusively 
with  battle  are  largely  embellished  with  them.  The 
Fifteenth  has  sixteen  similes,  the  Sixteenth  has 
eighteen,  and  the  Seventeenth  has  nineteen.  In  the 
Second  there  are  thirteen,  all  of  them  intended  to  set 
off  the  gatherings  and  array  of  the  Army. 

In  the  Odyssey,  the  greater  or  detailed  similes  be- 
come very  much  fewer.  They  are  only  forty-one  ;  and 
this  not  only  before  the  arrival  in  Ithaca,  where  the 
action  is  highly  varied,  and  the  movement  quick  ;  but 
also  in  the  latter  half  of  the  Poem,  after  the  arrival  of 
Odysseus  in  Ithaca,  when  it  is  more  relaxed :  since 
the  lower  tone  of  the  diction  and  of  the  subject  does 
not  call  for,  or  perhaps  even  admit,  this  kind  of  gor- 
geous ornament ;  perhaps  also,  according  to  a  very 
natural  and  reasonable  supposition,  because  these 
books  were  composed  in  the  declining  years  of  Homer, 
as  they  certainly  indicate,  with  some  noble  and  brilliant 
exceptions,  a  lower  standard  of  power. 

The  character,  too,  of  the  greater  similes  in  the 
Odyssey  entirely  changes.  The  lion  appears,  but  four 
times,1  the  vulture  once,2  war  never,  storm  never.  In- 
dustry, domestic  life,  the  phenomena  of  outward  nature 
when  she  is  tranquil,  now  supply  the  materials  to  the 
hand  of  the  Poet. 

The  similes  of  the  Odyssey,  then,  have  the  same 
harmonious  relation  to  the  Poem  they  embellish,  as  we 
find  in  the  Iliad.  And  we  should  bear  in  mind,  that 
in  nothing  has  Homer  more  emphatically  established 
a  type  of  his  own,  than  in  the  matter  of  similes.  This 


1  Od.  iv.  335,  791 ;  vi.  130 ;  xxii.  402. 


2  Od.  xxii.  303. 


520 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


being  so,  a  treatment  so  remarkable  and  characteristic, 
found  in  each  of  the  two  Poems,  furnishes  of  itself 
one  among  the  very  large  number  of  particulars,  which 
go  to  make  up  an  inductive  argument  for  the  unity  of 
their  authorship. 

The  similes  of  Homer  may  in  one  sense  be  consid- 
ered as  a  miniature  of  the  Poems  themselves.  Accom- 
panying the  movement  of  the  action,  they  sweep  the 
entire  round  of  human  life.  There  is  in  them  the 
same  elasticity  and  variety,  as  in  the  thought  and 
the  style :  these  they  follow  over  hill  and  dale,  as  the 
faithful  dog  follows  the  step  of  his  master.  Their 
tone  changes  in  precise  proportion  to  that  of  the  sub- 
ject, and  of  the  effect  that  the  Poet  seeks  to  produce. 

The  similes  afford,  as  I  conceive,  one  among  the 
incidental  proofs  that,  if  Homer  was  indeed  blind,  he 
was  blind  not  from  his  birth,  but  from  subsequent 
failure  of  the  organ,  or  calamity.  The  experience  of 
hunting  in  the  woods  and  among  the  mountains,  for 
example,  is  detailed  with  a  vivid  exactness  which  im- 
plies a  knowledge  founded  on  experience,  just  as  expe- 
rience in  this  case  seems  probably  to  imply  vigorous 
limbs,  hardy  habits,  and  the  perfection  of  the  organs 
of  sense. 


CHAPTER  XV. 


Miscellaneous. 

Section  I.    The  Idea  of  Beauty  in  Homer. 

The  conception  of  beauty  in  the  Poems  of  Homer  is 
alike  intense  and  chaste.  He  never  associates  Beauty 
with  evil  in  such  a  manner,  as  to  attract  our  sympa- 
thies towards  a  bad  or  contemptible  person.  This  is 
markedly  shown  by  his  treatment  of  Aphrodite,  of 
Nireus,  and  of  Paris,  on  whose  personal  beauty  he 
never  dwells  as  he  does  on  that  of  Nausicaa1  or  of 
Euphorbos.2  Only  on  the  one  occasion  when  he  has 
shown  some  sense  of  shame  and  duty,  and  is  going 
forth  full-armed  to  battle,  is  this  prince  allowed  to 
appear  for  a  moment  otherwise  than  despicable.3  It  is 
not  by  a  didactic  morality,  but  by  a  genuine  impulse 
and  habit  of  nature,  that  Homer  thus  joins  and  severs, 
as  far  as  in  him  lies,  what  ought  to  be  joined  and  sev- 
ered respectively.  The  legend  of  Ganymede,4  which 
was  afterwards  perverted  to  the  purposes  of  depravity, 
is  in  Homer  perfectly  pure,  and  indeed  seems  to  re- 


1  Od.  vi.  149-169. 
3  II.  vi.  332,  505. 


2  II.  xvii.  50-60. 
*  II.  xx.  233-235. 


522 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


call,  though  it  is  in  a  lower  form,  the  tradition  of 
Enoch,  who  '  was  not,  for  God  took  him.' 1 

We  may,  however,  mark  the  downward  course  of 
these  traditions,  following  the  lapse  of  time.  Two 
generations  after  Ganymede,  Tithonos,  of  the  same 
family,  is  appropriated  by  the  goddess  Eos  as  a  hus- 
band.2 One  generation  more  gives  us  the  lawless  love 
of  Aphrodite  and  Anchises  ;3  and  the  same  goddess,  in 
the  next  generation,  promises  to  Paris  a  beautiful  wife, 
whom  he  was  to  obtain  by  treachery  and  violence  as 
well  as  adultery.  Priam  seems  wholly  without  rule 
on  this  subject;  he  charges  the  fall  of  Helen4  on  the 
gods,  and,  even  when  reviling  Paris  inclusively  with 
his  surviving  sons,  makes  no  reference  to  his  peculiar 
crimes.5 

It  would  appear  that  in  ascribing  so  much  beauty  to 
the  royal  family  of  Troy,  Homer  may  have  been  fol- 
lowing tradition.  When  treating  of  the  Greeks,  he 
appears  to  award  it  in  pretty  close  proportion  to  general 
excellence.  Achilles,  the  greatest  hero  of  the  Greeks,  is 
the  most  beautiful  ;6  and  Thersites,  their  basest  wretch, 
is  loaded  with  ugliness  and  deformity.7  Odysseus,  the 
counterpart  without  being  the  rival,  of  Achilles,  has 
undoubted  beauty  of  a  different  kind,  although  with- 
out lofty  stature  ; 8  and  Ajax,  the  second  of  the  army 
in  strength,  is  in  the  Odyssey  called  second  in  beauty 
also.9 

We  may  trace  the  value  set  by  Homer  on  personal 
beauty  not  only  in  the  loving  spirit  of  passages  such  as 

i  Gen.  v.  24.  2  II.  xi.  i.    Od.  v.  i.  3  II.  ii.  821. 

4  II.  iii.  164.  5  11.  xxiv.  260. 

e  ii.  ii.  674 ;  xxiv.  629.    Od.  xi.  470.  *  II.  ii.  216-219. 

8  II.  iii.  193.  9  Od.  xi.  470. 


MISCELLANEOUS. 


523 


those  that  relate  to  Euphorbos  and  Nausicaa,  and  in 
his  assignment  of  the  gift  to  his  two  protagonists, 
but  also  in  some  notes  appertaining  to  the  two  nations 
respectively.  No  Trojan  is  allowed  the  glory  of  that 
auburn  hair  which  is  ascribed  to  Achilles,1  in  one  place 
to  Odysseus,2  and  habitually  to  Menelaos.  Nor  are 
they  ever  adorned  collectively  with  epithets  of  personal 
attractiveness  such  as  those  given  to  the  Greeks  of 
the  flashing  eye  (ikUtaTteg),8  of  the  flowing  hair  Qaciq^ao- 
liomvteg^)^  and  of  the  admirable  beauty  (el8og  dytjtoi).6 
And  while,  in  the  case  of  Nireus,  Homer  has  care- 
fully discriminated  between  mind  and  body,  he  has  so 
marked  his  perfection  of  form  that  no  reader  of  the 
Iliad,  however  careless,  can  fail  to  be  impressed  by  the 
record.  Manifestly,  too,  he  delivers  his  own  sentiments 
from  the  mouth  of  Odysseus  at  the  Court  of  Alkinoos, 
where  he  speaks  of  beauty,  the  power  of  thought,  and 
the  power  of  speech,  as  the  three  great  gifts  of  the  gods 
to  the  individual  man.6 

Stature,  as  well  as  form,  entered  very  much  into  the 
conception  of  beauty  among  the  ancients  ;  and  this  for 
women  as  well  as  men.  Yet  he  was  sensible,  at  least 
with  respect  to  women,  that  tallness  might  pass  into 
excess.  Accordingly,  among  the  Laistrugones,  when 
two  comrades  of  Odysseus  met  the  queen,  4  they  found 
her  big  as  a  mountain's  top,  and  loathed  her.' 7 

Homer  had  a  profound  perception  of  the  beauty  of 
animals,  at  least  in  the  case  of  the  horse,  as  to  color, 
form,  and  especially  movement.    We  trace  in  him  a 


1  II.  i.  197.  2  od.  xiii.  399. 

4  II.  ii.  11,  et  passim. 
6  Od.  viii.  167-177. 


3  II.  i.  389,  et  alibi. 
5  II.  v.  787  ;  viii.  228. 
1  Od.  x.  113. 


524 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


commencement  of  the  pedigrees  of  this  animal.1  It  is 
with  an  intense  sympathy  that  the  Poet  describes  the 
lordly  creature  and  his  motions,  which  he  has  idealized 
up  to  the  highest  point  by  the  tears  of  horses,  their 
speech,  and  their  scouring  the  expanse  of  sea  and  the 
tips  of  standing  corn.2  The  whole  series  of  passages 
relating  to  the  horse  in  the  Iliad  is  noble  and  emphatic 
throughout ;  and  in  no  parts  of  the  Poems  can  we  more 
distinctly  trace,  by  the  slower  or  quicker  movement  of 
his  verse,  his  adaptation  of  sound  to  sense.  Space 
does  not  permit  me  here  to  exhibit  in  detail  the  proofs 
of  Homer's  admiration  for  the  beauty  of  the  horse.3 

The  appreciation  of  landscape  was  a  faculty  less 
highly  developed  in  Homer ;  yet  it  surely  existed. 
The  mountainous  country  of  Laceda^mon,  which  he 
calls  hollow,  he  also  calls  lovely  ;4  the  epithet  employed 
(erateinos)  being  the  same  which  he  uses  to  describe 
Hermione,  the  daughter  of  Helen,  a  person  endowed 
with  the  beauty  of  golden  Aphrodite.5  Corfu,  to  which 
he  applies  the  same  descriptive  word,6  is  in  our  day  of 
the  highest  fame  for  the  beauty  of  its  scenery. 

Again,  Telemachos  apprises  Menelaos  that  Ithaca 
is  a  goat-feeding  island,  without  meadows,  and  more 
eperatos  than  a  horse-feeding  country.7  The  epithet 
is  equivalent  to  the  one  last  before  mentioned  ;  and 
as  the  meaning  is  that  a  hill-country  is  more  beautiful 
to  the  eye  than  champaign,  we  seem  here  to  have  a 
distinct  appreciation  of  the  beauty  of  scenery.  The 
famous  simile  of  the  watch-fires  and  the  sky  by  night 

i  II.  v.  265-273 ;  xx.  221.  2  n.  xx.  226. 

3  See  Studies  on  Homer,  iii.  410-416. 

4  II.  ii.  581 ;  iii.  239.    Od.  iv.  1.  5  Od.  iv.  13. 

«  Od.  vii.  79.  7  Od.  iv.  606. 


MISCELLANEOUS. 


525 


appears  to  carry  something  of  a  like  interpretation.1 
And  as  regards  the  more  limited  combinations  of  what 
may  be  termed  home-views,  we  have  at  the  least  two 
great  instances  in  the  Odyssey :  one  of  them  the  gar- 
den of  Alkinoos;2  the  other  the  grotto  of  Calypso,  of 
which  he  closes  his  description  by  saying  that  '  even 
an  Immortal,  on  beholding  it,  would  be  seized  with 
wonder  and  delight.'  3 

At  the  same  time,  I  do  not  doubt  that  life,  and  not 
repose,  is  the  grand  and  vital  element  of  beauty  in  the 
conceptions  of  Homer,  whether  they  are  applied  to 
nature,  or  to  the  animated  world. 

Section  II.    The  Idea  of  Art  in  Homer. 

The  Homeric  Poems  give  us  a  view  substantially 
clear  of  the  state  of  art  in  the  time  of  the  Poet.  They 
also  contain  conceptions  of  the  principle  of  art,  so 
vivid  as  perhaps  never  to  have  been  surpassed.  And, 
unless  I  am  mistaken,  they  indicate  to  us  the  source 
from  which  the  specific  excellence  of  Greek  Art,  in  its 
highest  form,  proceeded.  By  the  term  Art,  I  understand 
the  production  of  beauty  in  material  forms  palpable 
to  the  eye  ;  whether  associated  with  industrial  purposes 
or  not. 

First,  then,  there  are  many  works  of  art  mentioned 
in  Homer :  but,  in  the  whole  of  them,  it  is  associated 
with  some  purpose  of  utility.  The  greatest  of  them 
all  is  the  Shield  of  Achilles.  Next  to  which,  perhaps, 
comes  the  armor  of  Agamemnon  ; 4  various  bowls,  men- 


i  II.  viii.  557. 
3  Od.  y.  63-75. 


2  Od.  vii.  112-132. 
4  II.  xi.  15-46. 


526 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


tioned  in  different  places  ; 1  the  baldric  of  Heracles  ; 2 
and  the  golden  clasp  of  the  mantle  of  Odysseus.3  In 
all  of  them,  living  form  is  represented.  There  are 
other  objects  of  a  less  defined  class,  but  belonging 
rather  to  mere  decoration.  Such  are  the  necklace  of 
gold  and  amber,  carried  by  the  Phoinikes  to  Surie  ; 4 
the  couch  or  chair  of  Penelope,  with  a  stool  to  match;5 
and  the  burnished  sheets  of  copper  in  the  palaces  of 
Alkinoos  and  Menelaos.6  There  are  also  works  of 
simple  mechanical  skill,  such  as  the  airy  net  of  metal 
worked  by  Hephaistos.7  We  find  in  the  Poems  no 
production  of  what  is  termed  pure  art :  everything,  to 
which  art  is  applied,  has  an  object  beyond  itself:  utility 
aspires  to  be  decked  with  beauty ;  and  beauty  is  never 
dissociated  from  utility. 

Next,  as  to  the  material  of  art.  We  have  in  Homer 
no  sign  of  the  use  of  any  material,  except  metal,  for 
the  production  of  beautiful  forms  ;  and,  specifically, 
the  metals  of  gold,  silver,  tin,  and  copper.  It  seems 
probable  that  there  were,  at  least  in  Troy,  statues  of 
the  gods.  But  probably  also  these  were  rude  images 
of  wood,  such  as  Pausanias  describes  under  the  name 
of  xoana,  in  which  Homer  would  find  nothing  answer- 
ing to  his  conception  of  beauty. 

As  to  the  range  of  art  in  point  of  subjects,  we  must 
consider  it,  in  all  likelihood,  as  almost  entirely  confined 
to  the  exhibition  of  form,  and  of  form  too,  in  the  solid. 
Of  painting  proper,  and  therefore  of  colors  as  con- 
nected with  painting,  we  have  no  sign ;  though  we 

1  II.  xxiii.  740-750.  Od.  iv.  613-619. 

2  Od.  xi.  609-614.  3  Od.  xix.  226-231. 
4  Od.  xv.  459.                                    5  Od.  xix.  55-58. 

6  Od.  iv.  72;  vii.  86.  1  Od.  viii.  279. 


MISCELLANEOUS. 


527 


have  one  case  of  the  use  of  a  single  color,  in  the  stain- 
ing of  ivory.1  But  the  use  of  the  sheets  of  copper, 
already  mentioned,  is  a  step  in  that  direction ;  and  the 
intermixture  of  varieties  of  metal,  especially  on  the 
Shield  of  Achilles,  and  in  the  armor  of  Agamemnon, 
show  what  was  perhaps  the  fullest  resort  to  the  prin- 
ciple of  color  that  the  limited  command  of  material 
permitted. 

As  to  the  seat  of  art,  we  cannot  affirm  that  it  had  as 
yet  for  any  purpose  been  practically  established  in 
Greece.  No  single  operation  is  recorded  in  the  Poems 
which  gives  an  indication  of  high  metallic  skill  as 
having  been  attained  anywhere  in  that  country.  By 
far  the  most  considerable  is  the  bedstead  of  Odysseus, 
which  is  adorned  with  gold,  silver,  and  copper :  but 
then  Odysseus  is  a  master  in  every  art,  almost  a 
magician :  and  we  are  not  told  that  even  his  art 
included  the  representation  of  living  form.2  The 
coloring  process,  to  which  reference  has  been  made, 
is  supposed  to  be  carried  on,  not  by  a  Greek,  but  by 
a  Meonian  or  a  Carian  woman.  And  in  most  of  the 
cases  where  a  true  work  of  art  is  mentioned,  it  is 
referred  directly  to  Sidon  or  the  Phoenician  ;  in  one  or 
two  instances  to  Thrace,  on  the  shore  of  which  the 
Phoenicians  seem  to  have  had  settlements.  In  other 
cases  it  is  referred,  like  the  Shield,  to  Hephaistos,  a 
god  of  Phoenician  associations.  In  the  case  of  the 
bowl,  presented  by  the  king  of  the  Sidonians  to  Mene- 
laos,3  we  are  told  expressly  that  it  was  the  work  of 
Hephaistos.  The  gold-beater  and  the  ioXkzvq,  or  smith, 
are  known  to  Homer ;  but  only,  as  far  as  appears,  for 


i  II.  iv.  141. 


2  Od.  xxiii.  195-201. 


3  Od.  iy.  615-619. 


528 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


the  simplest  operations ;  the  former  simply  attaches  a 
plate  or  band  of  gold  to  the  horns  of  the  sacrificial  ox, 
and  it  appears  from  the  passage  that  he  did  not  ply  a 
separate  trade,  but  was  merely  the  copper-smith  en- 
gaged in  beating  gold,1  inasmuch  as  he  is  called 
chalkeus,  as  well  as  chrusochoos.  All  that  related 
to  the  execution  of  works  of  art,  so  far  as  we  can 
judge  from  the  Poems,  the  Achaian  Greeks  had  yet  to 
learn. 

But  as  in  other  points,  so  in  this,  the  Poet  opened 
the  way  for  his  countrymen,  and  taught  them  how 
they  should  walk  along  it  in  the  after-time.  As  his, 
perception  of  beauty  in  living  form  was  most  keen,  so 
his  idea  of  art  in  forms  inanimate,  copied  from  nature, 
was  alike  powerful  and  simple  :  it  was  that  which 
brought  them  up  to  life.  In  the  nature  of  things,  we 
perhaps  may  say,  it  cannot  be  carried  farther.  The 
chairs  of  Hephaistos  moved  spontaneously.2  The 
porter-dogs  of  Alkinoos,  wrought  in  gold  and  silver,3 
were  of  an  immortal  youth.  The  metallic  handmaids 
of  the  god  himself  were  endowed  with  thought  as  well 
as  motion.4  In  the  ploughing  scene  upon  the  Shield, 
as  the  furrow  is  turned,  the  earth  darkens,  though  it 
is  of  gold.5  And  in  the  battle  compartment,  the  sculp- 
tured warriors  fight,  and  the  dead  are  dragged  off  the 
field,  with  actual  movement  as  in  a  scene  of  war.6 
Such  is  the  bold  delineation  by  which  the  oldest  poet 
of  Art  has  given  the  challenge  to  his  successors,  and 
bids  them  excel  him  if  they  can. 

But  all  these  representations,  however  raised  into 


i  Od.  iii.  432-438. 
4  II.  xviii.  417. 


2  II.  xviii.  375. 
5  II.  xviii.  649. 


3  Od.  vii.  91. 

6  II,  xviii.  533-540. 


MISCELLANEOUS. 


529 


sublimity  by  genius,  msut  have  had  a  basis  in  fact; 
and  it  seems  difficult  to  resist  the  conclusion  that 
Homer,  and  the  Greeks  of  his  time,  must  have  seen, 
though  they  had  not  yet  learned  to  make,  art-works  of 
a  high  order,  imported,  without  doubt,  in  general  from 
Phoenicia,  and  produced  either  there  or  further  east- 
wards. 

The  Sidonian  works  themselves,  if  executed,  as 
Homer  commonly  represents,  in  gold  and  silver,  were 
doomed  without  doubt  to  perish,  so  soon  as  the  time 
should  arrive  when  men  might  come  to  prize  the 
workmanship  less,  than  the  application  of  the  mere 
material  to  other  uses.  But  if  we  may  judge  from 
the  testimony  of  such  remains  as  are  now  accessible, 
there  were  two  great  schools,  with  which  Phoenician 
artists  must  have  been  in  relation,  alike  from  their 
political  and  their  geographical  connections :  the 
Egyptian  and  the  Assyrian.  It  is  not,  I  suppose,  too 
much  to  say,  that  we  perceive,  in  a  portion  at  least  of 
the  actual  remains  of  these  schools,  the  attainment 
of  high  excellence  in  intention  and  design,  with  no 
inconsiderable  progress  in  execution.  They  seem, 
however,  to  me  to  represent  different  principles :  the 
Assyrian  appears  to  embody  the  principle  of  life  and 
motion  ;  the  Egyptian,  the  principle  of  repose.  If  this 
be  true,  there  can  be  little  doubt,  I  presume,  that  the 
ideas  of  Homer  had  their  base  and  fountain-head  much 
more  in  the  former  than  in  the  latter.  But  in  any 
case,  it  would  really  seem  probable,  from  the  vivid  and 
stirring  descriptions  of  Homer,  that  these  Phoenician 
importations  supplied  patterns,  and  suggested  ideas, 
which  might  well,  in  process  of  time,  become  the 
nucleus  of  the  first  great  efforts  of  Greek  art. 

34 


530  JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 

When  that  nucleus  was  once  supplied,  and  when 
the  new  life  began  to  grow,  then  the  Olympian  system 
of  religion  provided  it,  through  the  union  of  the  divine 
nature  to  the  human  form,  with  that  lofty  aim,  which 
braced  it  to  a  perpetual  effort  upwards,  and  so  con- 
veyed to  it  the  pledge  and  the  talisman  of  all  tran- 
scendent excellence.  Every  idea  appertaining  to  deity 
was  held  capable  of  representation  in  matter :  but  it 
could  only  be  matter  moulded  according  to  the  shape 
of  man.  Thus  Greek  art  was  a  perpetual  untiring 
pursuit  of  the  highest  standard  of  the  ideal,  while  it 
seems  to  have  had  for  its  starting-point  foreign  models 
which,  though  not  similarly  inspired,  were  of  such 
high  merit  as  to  suggest  to  Homer  that  imitation 
might  run  no  unsuccessful  race  with  nature.  This 
happy  union  of  the  most  fundamental  conditions  of 
design  and  execution  was  seconded  by  the  lights  of  a 
fine  climate,  by  the  possession  of  the  purest  marbles, 
and  by  the  corporal  perfection  of  a  race  abounding  in 
the  noblest  models.  We  cannot  wonder  that,  with 
these  advantages,  Greece,  within  her  'limits  of  knowl- 
edge and  experience,  should  have  held  down  to  our 
own  day  the  throne  of  Art. 

Section  III.    Physics  of  Homer. 

Homer's  ideas  of  physics  were  extremely  simple,  as 
well  as  apparently  few.  He  perceived  that  rivers  were 
fed  by  rain  and  snow ;  and  therefore  he  calls  them 
Jumtkg,  Zeus-fallen,  which  we  should  probably  under- 
stand to  mean  4  coming  from  the  realm  of  Zeus.'  Fire 
is  the  single  element  which  he  seems  in  any  direct 
mode  to  identify  with  an  Olympian  Deity,  and  this 


MISCELLANEOUS. 


531 


only  in  one  undoubted  instance,  where  he  calls  it 
Hephaistos.  He  considered  the  human  body  to  be 
composed  of  the  elements  which  make  up  earth  and 
water,  for  he  treats  it  as  resolvable  by  Death  into 
these  substances.1  It  is  not  easy  to  arrive  at  a  positive 
conclusion  about  his  conception  of  the  figure  of  the 
Earth,  beyond  the  fact  that  he  considered  it  to  be 
oblong,  which  may  be  probably  shown  from  a  compari- 
son of  many  passages  in  the  Poems.  The  land,  as 
known  to  his  experience,  was  limited.  A  circle,  of 
from  350  to  400  miles  in  diameter,  would  have  com- 
prised more  than  all  the  places,  that  were  within  the 
limits  of  ordinary  Greek  knowledge  and  experience. 
All  his  ideas  of  vastness  were  connected  with  the  sea. 
From  his  placing  the  River  Ocean  at  all  points  of  the 
compass,  and  his  making  it  flow  round  the  Earth, 
together  with  the  general  disposition  of  objects  on  the 
Shield  of  Achilles,  he  may  be  imagined  to  have  con- 
ceived of  our  planet  as  a  flat  surface.  On  the  other 
hand,  he  seems  to  connect  the  extreme  East  with  the 
farthest  West,  Sunset  with  Sunrise,  as  if  he  thought  it 
were  a  surface  wrapped  (so  to  speak)  round  a  cylinder. 
For,  placing  in  the  far  east  the  Island  of  Thrinaki&  and 
the  Oxen  of  the  Sun,  he  makes  that  deity  declare  that 
with  these  animals  he  amused  himself  not  only  when 
he  rose,  but  when  he  returned  from  heaven  to  earth  ; 
that  is  to  say,  at  the  time  of  his  setting.  To  this  idea 
there  is  a  partial  approximation  in  the  formation  of  a 
shield,  such  as  it  appears  either  uniformly.or  commonly 
to  have  been  in  the  time  of  Homer,  namely  an  oval,  or 
oblong.     The  Homeric  shield  is  called  dpyifiQozrj  as 


i  II.  vii.  99. 


532 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


covering  the  human  figure.  But  it  is  also  called  evxvxXog. 
Does  this  refer  to  a  rounding  at  the  top  and  bottom? 
or  does  it  more  probably  mean  that  an  horizontal  sec- 
tion of  the  shield  represented  a  segment  of  a  well- 
drawn  circle  ?  If  the  latter  be  the  meaning,  the  two 
epithets  are  placed  in  thorough  harmony.  For,  the 
more  the  shield  is  rounded  horizontally,  the  more  does 
it  shelter  the  warrior  who  uses  it.  And  this  form 
might  agree  with  the  passage  in  Od.  xii.  380,1  where 
the  4  return '  of  the  Sun  may  mean  his  passing  from 
the  point  at  which  men  lose  him  in  the  West,  to  his 
bed  or  place  of  rising  (dvrolai)  in  the  East.2 

The  amusing  threat  of  the  Sun,  that  he  will  go  down 
to  Hades  and  shine  there,  is  not  so  strange  or  far- 
fetched, relatively  to  Homeric  ideas,  as  might  at  first 
sight  appear.  For,  while  he  set  and  rose  in  the  tceqi- 
xalXrtg  Xlfxv}],8  the  exceeding  beautiful  expanse  of 
Okeanos,  as  he  had  to  make  his  way  from  the  Okeanos 
of  the  West  to  the  Okeanos  of  the  East,  he  might  easily 
be  thought,  in  doing  this,  to  pass  through,  or  near,  that 
underground  region,  in  which  dwelt  the  Gods-Avengers, 
and  which  was  the  realm  of  Aides  and  Persephone*. 
A'ides,  says  Poseidon,  obtained  by  lot  the  tfcpog  feooeig.* 
Now  zophos  in  Homer  is  used  to  signify  the  West: 
and  yet  Odysseus  enters  the  realm  of  A'idoneus  in  the 
East,  near  the  Sunrise.  With  all  that  dark  subterra- 
nean space  between,  the  Olympian  Immortals  had  no 
concern :  for  them,  as  for  us,  the  light  of  the  Sun  both 

1  We  might  be  tempted  to  treat  as  Phoenician  this  piece  of  cos- 
mology. But  we  should  then  perhaps  be  pushing  to  an  extreme  the 
doctrine  of  a  Phoenician  origin  for  the  Theotechny  of  the  middle  Odys- 
sey, which  would  hardly  reach  so  far  into  details. 

2  Od.  xii.  4.  3  Od.  hi.  1.  4  II.  xv.  191. 


MISCELLANEOUS. 


533 


came  and  went ;  '  He  rose  on  gods  and  men,  over  the 
teeming  earth.'1  The  change  threatened  to  be  made 
may  have  been  only  this,  that  the  Sun,  instead  of  pass- 
ing through  or  round  the  dwelling  of  A'ides,  would 
remain  there.  Zeus  therefore  takes  his  menace  as 
perfectly  serious,  and  replies  in  effect,  6  Do  as  hereto- 
fore, and  all  shall  be  right.'  2 

Section  IV.    Metals  in  Homer. 

Archaeological  inquiry  is  now  teaching  us  to  inves- 
tigate and  to  mark  off  the  periods  of  human  progress, 
among  other  methods,  by  the  materials  employed  from 
age  to  age  for  making  utensils  and  implements.  And 
the  Poems  of  Homer  have  this  among  their  many 
peculiarities  ;  they  exhibit  to  us,  with  as  much  clear- 
ness perhaps  as  any  archaeological  investigation,  one 
of  the  metallic  ages.  It  is  moreover  the  first  and  oldest 
of  the  metallic  ages,  the  age  of  copper,  which  precedes 
the  general  knowledge  of  the  art  of  fusing  metals  ; 
which  (as  far  as  general  rules  can  be  laid  down)  im- 
mediately follows  the  age  of  stone,  and  which  in  its 
turn  is  probably  often  followed  by  the  age  of  bronze, 
when  the  combination  of  copper  with  tin  has  come 
within  the  resources  of  human  art. 

The  grand  metallic  operation  of  the  Poems  is  that 
of  Hephaistos  in  the  production  of  the  Shield.  The. 
metals  used3  were  gold,  silver,  tin,  and  chalcos,  which 
has  been  by  mere  license  of  translators  interpreted  as 
brass,  for  there  was  no  brass  till  long  ages  after  Homer 
had  rolled  away  :  which  has  been  more  plausibly  taken 


i  Od.  iii.  3. 


2  Od.  xii.  384-388. 


3  II.  xviii.  474. 


534 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


to  mean  bronze :  but  which,  after  a  good  deal  of 
inquiry,  I  am  satisfied  can  only  mean  copper,  either 
universally  and  absolutely,  or  as  a  general  rule,  with 
very  insignificant  exceptions. 

The  discussion  would  be  too  long  for  this  place. 
But  the  passage  immediately  before  us  of  itself  affords 
almost  sufficient  instruction. 

In  the  formation  of  the  Shield,  there  is  no  mixture 
or  fusion  of  metals.  The  same,  and  all  the  same, 
which  are  put  into  the  roaring  fire,  reappear,  each  by 
its  original  name,  in  various  portions  of  the  Shield. 
There  is  indeed  one  passage,  where  a  trench  is  repre- 
sented, and  this  is  called  kuanee,  a  word  meaning 
either  made  of  kuanos,  or  like  kuanos  in  color. 
There  are  two  reasons  for  giving  the  latter  significa- 
tion to  the  word.  One,  that  it  commonly  bears  that 
sense  in  Homer ;  the  other,  that  though  kuanos  may 
have  been  a  mixed  metal,  yet  there  is  no  sign  of  found- 
ing or  casting  in  this  great  masterpiece  of  Hephaistos. 

He  could  only  mix  by  melting ;  and  had  he  melted 
metals,  we  must  have  heard  of  moulds  to  receive 
them.  Instead  of  this,  the  only  instruments  which  he 
makes  ready  for  the  work 1  are 

1.  The  anvil. 

2.  The  hammer  in  his  (right)  hand. 

3.  The  pincers  in  his  left. 

It  is  plain,  then,  that  he  was  supposed  not  to  melt, 
but  only  to  soften  the  metals  by  heating,  and  then 
to  beat  them  into  the  forms  he  wished  to  produce. 

Had  Homer  been  conversant  with  the  fusing  or 
casting  of  metals,  this  is  the  very  place  where  we  must 

i  II.  xviii.  476,  477. 


MISCELLANEOUS. 


535 


have  become  aware  of  it ;  especially  as  his  works  o  f 
skilled  art  are  all  of  Phoenician  origin  or  kin,  and 
his  Hephaistos  is  a  god  of  Phoenician  associations. 

If  chalcos  be  not  copper,  then  copper  is  never 
mentioned  in  Homer.  But,  in  an  early  stage  of  society, 
copper  was  commonly  by  far  the  cheapest  and  most  - 
accessible  of  metals  ;  and  it  is  quite  impossible  to 
suppose,  that  we  never  once  hear  of  copper  from  an 
author,  who  incessantly  makes  mention  (so  it  is 
argued)  of  another  metal,  whereof  it  is  by  far  the 
largest  component  part. 

One  of  Homer's  epithets  for  chalcos  is  eruthros, 
red ;  and  this  it  is  impossible  under  any  conditions 
to  apply  to  bronze. 

There  is  abundant  evidence  of  a  correspondence 
between  the  seven  metals  of  Homer,  and  the  seven 
metals  of  the  ancient  planetary  worship  of  the  East : 
but  one  of  these  is  copper,  and  from  it  Cyprus  was 
named ;  and  Homer  introduces  Mentes  sailing  to  a 
port  of  Cyprus  (Temese)  for  chalcos.1 

We  find  chalcos  in  Homer  a  very  cheap  and 
common  metal ;  tin  a  very  scarce  and  rare  metal,  only 
used  in  very  small  quantities,  and  even  approaching  in 
some  degree  to  the  character  of  what  we  now  term  a 
precious  metal.  It  is  very  improbable  that  the  defen- 
sive armor,  and  all  the  meaner  utensils,  in  Homer 
could  have  contained  an  eighth  part,  or  thereabouts, 
of  tin. 

So  Hesiod,  in  his  age  of  chalcos,  represents  not 
only  the  arms  and  implements,  but  the  dwellings  as 
made  of  that  material.2  This  courd  not  have  been 
bronze. 

i  Od.  i.  184.  2  Opp.  143-155. 

f 


536  JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 

And  I  have  high  metallurgical  authority  for  stating, 
that  the  sheathing  of  chalcos  on  walls  as  already  men- 
tioned must,  for  mechanical  reasons,  have  been  some 
material  other  than  bronze. 

It  is  said  that  chalcos  cannot  be  hardened  so  as  to 
make  a  cutting  tool ;  whereas  this  material  is  named 
in  Homer  as  used  for  peeling  bark,  and  cutting  twigs 
and  young  branches,  as  well  as  for  making  weapons 
of  war.1  We  have,  however,  in  at  least  one  place  its 
imperfection  by  reason  of  softness  noticed.2  But,  as 
portions  of  tin  are  found  in  some  copper  ores,  may 
it  not  be  that  there  were  also  small  portions  of  it 
in  virgin  copper  used  for  these  purposes  ?  I  find, 
moreover,  that  ancient  nails  have  been  discovered, 
containing  97|  per  cwt.  of  copper,  and  only  2\  of 
tin :  and  surgical  instruments  made  of  copper  alone 
have  been  discovered  recently  in  a  tomb  at  Athens.3 

But  although  it  seems  clear  that  chalcos  in  general 
means  copper,  this  may  not  compel  us  absolutely  to 
exclude  from  its  signification  all  compositions  of  the 
nature  of  bronze.  In  later  times  the  word  appears 
to  have  included  both  senses.  The  Latin  aes  without 
an  epithet  described  a  compound  metal;  with  the 
epithet  cyprium  it  meant  copper.  Some  bronzes  with 
a  polish  are  not  wholly  unlike  copper,  though  they 
want  its  redness.  Possibly  some  sharp  instruments  of 
this  composition  might  be  imported  into  Greece,  with- 
out at  once  leading  to  a  distinction  of  name,  especially 
if  there  were  native  copper,  or  kinds  of  copper,  in 
use,  which  had  some  slight  natural  admixture  of  tin. 

i  II.  i.  236 ;  xxi.  37.  2  II.  xi.  237. 

3  Gobel,  Einfluss  der  Chimie  auf  die  Ermittelung  der  Volker  der 
Vorzeit,  pp.  25,  35. 


MISCELLANEOUS.  537 

But  these  cases  must  have  been  exceptional,  so  far 
as  the  use  of  the  word  in  the  Poems  is  concerned. 

Kuan os  is  generally  the  type  of  a  very  dark  color 
in  Homer,  and  the  word  may  possibly  mean  bronze. 
The  Greeks  had  it  in  small  quantities :  it  was  more 
valuable  than  copper,  but  apparently  less  prized  than 
tin.  In  the  planetary  worship  of  the  East,  six  deities 
were  connected  with  six  pure  metals,  and  one  with 
kuanos.  In  Homer  we  find  the  six  metals,  and  the 
kuanos.  Now  as  the  septiform  system  was  apparently 
represented  in  the  seven  gates  of  Thebes,  and  as  the 
Greeks  evidently  depended  on  the  Phoenicians  for  im- 
ported metals,  I  conclude  that  kuanos  is  the  seventh 
metal,  a  mixed  one  ;  and  I  know  no  conclusive  reason 
why  it  should  not  be  bronze.  It  was  used  only  for 
ornamentation,  and  in  small  quantities :  if  we  except 
the  cornice  of  kuanos  in  the  quasi-Phoenician  palace 
of  Alkinoos.1  Metals  in  those  days  seem  to  have  been 
the  great  basis  of  commerce,  when  there  was  no  appar- 
atus available  for  storing,  sheltering,  or  distributing 
with  rapidity,  perishable  materials. 

The  metals  of  Homer,  then,  are  — 

1.  Gold.  5.  Iron. 

2.  Silver.  6.  Chalcos  or  Copper. 

3.  Tin.  7.  Lead. 

4.  Kuanos. 

Silver  appears  to  have  been  rarer  than  gold :  as  might 
be  expected,  considering  that  it  is  chiefly  obtained  by 
scientific  means.  It  came  but  from  one  place,2  Alub£ 
in  Asia  Minor.    We  do  not  hear  of  it  as  used  in  ex- 


i  Od.  vii.  87. 


2  II.  ii.  857. 


538 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


change,  nor,  I  think,  in  stored  wealth  ;  but,  in  plating 
only,  and  in  works  of  art. 

The  respective  order  of  value  for  the  metals  is,  I 
believe,  that  in  which  I  have  just  placed  them.  Not 
so  their  quantities.  Of  lead  we  hear  very  little  in- 
deed. Iron  was  greatly  more  esteemed  than  copper, 
and  was  very  rare,  though  seemingly  more  abundant 
than  tin  or  kuanos.  We  hear  of  it,  together  with 
gold  and  copper,  as  an  article  of  stored  wealth.1  It 
was  only  used  for  cutting  instruments ;  and  chiefly,  as 
far  as  appears,  for  woodmen's  axes.  The  quantities  of 
all  the  metals  would  seem  to  have  been  very  limited, 
except  of  dial  cos  only. 

Gold  was  employed  in  plating,  for  works  of  art ;  it 
appears  also  as  stored  wealth,  and  moreover,  as  in  the 
Suit  on  the  Shield,  with  a  slight  approach  to  the  char- 
acter of  a  measure  of  value.2 

Tin  was  used  in  small  quantities  for  ornament,  and 
was  plated  on  copper.3  The  only  articles  entirely 
made  of  it  were  the  greaves  of  Achilles  ;  and  these 
proceeded  from  a  divine,  not  a  human,  workman.4 

Section  Y.    The  Measure  of  Value  in  Homer. 

Although  the  Greek  of  the  heroic  age  was  eminently 
temperate,  and  abhorrent  of  excess,  the  spirit  of  ac- 
quisition was  already  strong  within  him.  Not  only 
were  the  crude  elements  of  wealth  carefully  stored, 
but  works  of  art  had  begun  to  be  prized  ;  and  beau- 
tiful armor,  garments,  and  even  personal-  ornaments, 


1  II.  vi.  48,  et  alibi. 

3  II.  xxiii.  561 ;  xx.  271. 


2  II.  xviii.  507. 

4  II.  xxi.  582,  590-594. 


MISCELLANEOUS. 


539 


were  in  use  among  the  great.  We  have,  however, 
no  distinct  case  recorded  of  inland  commerce  as 
among  the  Greeks ;  and  the  business  of  exchange  had 
not  passed  beyond  the  form  of  barter. 

Yet  it  appears  that  gold  had  begun  to  be  used  as 
a  convenient  material  for  the  requital  of  service,  and 
probably  also  for  the  liquidation  of  penalty.  On  the 
Shield,  the  most  approved  Judge  was  to  receive  two 
talents  of  that  metal 1  for  his  sentence.  And  as  we 
hear  of  the  payment  of  fines  on  various  occasions2 
(distinguished,  in  the  terms  of  the  Pact,  from  the 
restitution  of  the  stolen  property),  it  is  probable  that 
there  is  a  reference  to  a  precious  metal.  The  epithets 
tiprjeig  and  EQizipog  or  '  priceful,'  3  applied  to  gold,  and 
to  that  only,  may  have  a  relation  to  this  custom.  In 
the  Twenty-second  Odyssey,  we  have  a  r?p/  or  fine  of 
gold  and  copper.4 

But  a  measure  of  service  is  one  thing,  and  a  meas- 
ure of  value  for  exchange  is  another  ;  and  we  have 
no  sign  that  gold  or  silver  was  used  as  a  common 
standard,  to  place  commodities  in  any  definite  relation 
of  value  to  one  another  ;  although  the  hoarding,  of 
gold  in  particular,  was  a  step  towards  this  further  de- 
velopment. Another  initial  sign  was  the  division  of 
the  metal  into  fixed  and  equal  quantities,  which  is 
recorded  on  the  Shield. 

The  only  commodity  which  approximates,  in  the 
actual  usage  exhibited  by  the  Poems,  to  a  measure 
of  value,  is  the  ox  ;  for  in  this  alone  other  commodities 
are  priced.   The  arms  of  Diomed  are  worth  nine  oxen ; 

1  II.  xviii.  507. 

2  II.  ix.  632-634  ;  xiii.  669.    Od.  ii.  192. 

3  II.  xviii.  475 ;  cf.  ix.  268.  4  Qd.  xxii.  57-59. 


540 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


those  of  Glaucos  are  worth  a  hundred.1  The  tripod, 
which  was  the  first  prize  for  wrestlers  in  the  Twenty- 
third  Iliad,  was  valued  at  twelve  oxen ;  the  woman 
captive,  skilled  in  works  of  industry,  at  four.2  This 
case  does  not  probably  exhibit  the  normal  relations; 
for  in  the  camp  women-captives  would  be  cheap,  and 
oxen  dear.  Accordingly  we  find  that,  when  Eurucleia 
was  brought  to  Ithaca,  she  was  purchased  by  Laertes 
for  twenty  oxen,  or  for  the  value  of  them.3 

When  Euneos  sent  ships  laden  with  wine  to  trade 
with  the  Greek  army,  his  men  took  in  return  —  (1) 
copper,  (2)  iron,  (3)  hides,  (4)  slaves,  (5)  oxen. 
Probably  the  demand  for  wine  was  universal :  each 
paid  for  it  with  what  he  had  to  spare,  in  the  different 
kinds  of  booty  acquired.  It  is  not  likely  that  oxen 
would  be  sent  away  from  the  camp ;  but  it  may  be 
intended  that  the  men  of  Euneos  took  them  from 
those  who  had  them  beyond  their  wants,  as  a  com- 
modity which  they  could  easily  dispose  of  to  others  of 
the  chiefs  or  soldiery  less  amply  supplied.4 

And  we  have  seen  from  iEschylus,  in  the  Agamem- 
non, that  the  figure  of  the  ox  was  the  sign  first  im- 
printed upon  a  coin ;  doubtless  one  intended  to  rep- 
resent the  equivalent  in  the  metal  of  the  animal.5 

Section  VI.    The  Use  of  Number  in  Homer. 

The  idea  of  number  is  one  which,  up  to  a  certain 
point,  is  readily  grasped  by  an  average  adult  of  the 
present  day.  Persons  with  a  special  gift  apprehend 
the  idea,  with  the  same  clearness,  on  a  larger  scale. 


1  II.  vi.  236. 

4  II.  vii.  472-475. 


2  II.  xxiii.  702-705. 
5  Agam.  37. 


3  Od.  i.  431. 


MISCELLANEOUS. 


541 


Children  fall  short  of  those  who  are  grown  up,  and  in 
early  youth  have  no  distinct  conception  beyond  a  very 
few  units.  It  seems  that,  in  the  childhood  of  the  world, 
men  even  of  the  capacity  and  grasp  of  Homer  had  no 
definite  idea  of  numbers  beyond  a  very  narrow  range. 
By  a  definite  idea  of  numbers  I  mean  that,  which 
grasps  the  whole  without  losing  the  separate  concep- 
tion of  the  parts. 

We  find  in  Homer  as  round  numbers  the  sums  of 
ten  thousand,  and  nine  thousand.  An  accomplished 
person  knows  ten  thousand  things.1  The  shout  of 
Ares  was  like  that  of  nine  thousand  or  ten  thousand 
men.2  These  expressions  are  evidently  altogether 
vague. 

Erichthonios  had  three  thousand  horses.3  Euneos, 
who  came  to  trade  with  the  Achaian  army,  presented 
the  two  Atridai  with  a  thousand  metres  of  wine.4  At 
the  Trojan  bivouac,  a  thousand  watchfires  were  kindled 
on  the  plain.5  Iphidamas,  having  given  a  hundred 
oxen  to  gain  a  wife,  promises  a  thousand  goats  and 
sheep.6  Some  of  these  instances  are  obviously  figura- 
tive :  and  it  is  even  possible  that  all  are  so ;  for  we 
find  the  rough  and  indefinite  use  of  the  numeral  de- 
scending as  low  as  to  the  single  hundred.  It  is 
plain,  from  many  passages  in  the  Poems,  that  the 
hecatomb  does  not  mean  a  hundred  oxen,  but  only  a 
batch  of  oxen,  sufficient  for  one  of  the  more  solemn 
sacrifices.  Crete  has  in  one  passage  a  hundred  cities, 
in  another  ninety.7  Lucaon  says,  that  Achilles  sold 
him  in  Lemnos  for  the  value  of  a  hundred  oxen.8  But 


i  Od.  ii.  16.  2  ii.  v.  860. 

4  II.  vii.  471.  5  II.  viii.  562. 

1  II.  ii.  649.    Od.  xix.  174. 


3  II.  xx.  221. 
6  II.  xi.  244. 
8  II.  xxi.  79. 


542 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


though  a  prince  by  birth,  he  could  only  be  worth  a  very 
small  fraction  of  that  number  of  oxen,  when  sold  as  a 
slave  from  the  Greek  camp.  Every  gold  drop  or  tassel 
of  the  Aigis  of  Athene  was  worth  a  hundred  oxen.1 
This,  if  taken  literally,  would  assign  to  the  Aigis  itself 
a  weight  of  perhaps  not  less  than  a  ton  and  a  half, 
which  is  inadmissible,  since  she  carries  it  in  the  field 
among  the  Greeks,  and  must  be  in  a  certain  relation 
of  stature  to  them.2 

The  negative  evidence  of  the  Poems  is  in  conso- 
nance with  these  instances  of  the  positive  class.  The 
Poet  nowhere  states  the  numbers  of  the  Greek  Army ; 
not  even  of  any  of.  the  separate  contingents.  And 
when  he  gives  the  number  of  ships  for  each  contingent, 
it  is  in  every  instance,  except  a  very  few,  of  which  the 
highest  is  twenty-two,  a  round  number.  In  two  cases 
he  states  the  crews ;  they  are  120  and  50  respectively. 
These  numbers  have  been  taken  as  a  key  to  an  exact 
computation.  But  it  is  impossible  that  all  the  chief 
contingents  should  have  been  in  round  numbers  ;  and 
we  are  told  that  Agamemnon's  division  was  by  far  the 
first  in  number  of  men,3  whereas  in  number  of  ships 
it  was  but  very  little  beyond  some  others. 

Homer  has  clearly  shown  us  how  weak  he  felt  him- 
self in  the  use  of  numbers,  by  the  curious  passage  in 
which  he  compares  the  relative  numbers  of  Greeks  and 
Trojans  proper.  Were  they  to  be  counted,  says  Aga- 
memnon, the  Greeks  in  tens,  and  the  Trojans  appointed 
singly  to  serve  them  with  wine,  many  a  party  of  ten 
would  be  without  a  cup-bearer.4  Had  lie  been  in  any 
manner  familiar  with  the  use  of  numbers  on  a  large 


i  II.  ii.  448. 
3  II.  ii.  580. 


2  Studies  on  Honier,  vol.  iii.  p.  430. 
4  II.  ii.  123-128. 


MISCELLANEOUS. 


543 


scale,  he  could  not,  on  a  point  of  such  interest,  have 
been  contented  with  so  slight  and  vague  an  approxi- 
mation. We  may  therefore  be  sure  that  when  he 
speaks  of  the  thousand  watchfires  of  the  Trojan  biv- 
ouac, and  adds  that  by  each  fire  there  sat  fifty  warriors,1 
he  had  never  performed  the  mental  process,  to  us  so 
simple,  of  reckoning  the  force  in  arms  at  fifty  thou- 
sand. 

The  largest  number  which  I  find  in  the  Poems  with 
any  sign  of  definite  use,  is  that  of  the  fat  hogs  under 
the  care  of  Eumaios.  They  are  360; 2  and,  as  one  is 
daily  sent  down  to  the  banquet  of  the  Suitors,  they 
correspond  with  the  days  of  the  year ;  of  which  it  is 
probable  that,  with  the  help  of  the  months  as  an  inter- 
mediate step,  a  real  computation  had  been  made.3 

Except  where  aided  by  the  revolutions  of  the  seasons, 
or  by  some  fixed  usage,  Homer  is  extremely  vague  in 
the  specification  of  periods  of  time.  Odysseus  de- 
scribes as  6  yesterday  and  the  day  before,'  which  we 
may  take  as  the  equivalent  of  our  '  a  day  or  two  ago,' 
what  had  happened  at  a  distance  of  time  between  a 
fortnight  and  three  weeks  back.  The  periods  of  years 
which  go  beyond  a  generation  are  never  mentioned ; 
but  time  is  always  computed,  and  with  a  remarkable 
accuracy,  by  the  genealogies  of  notable  persons.  The 
generation,  or  ysverj,  appears  to  have  been  conceived 
by  the  Poet  as  equal  to  thirty  years  ;  and  yet  here  we 
ought  probably  to  say,  to  thirty  years  more  or  less. 
The  age  of  Nestor  was  evidently  about  or  over  seventy ; 
he  was  bearing  the  kingly  office  in  his  third  ysvsrj  or 
generation.4    And  it  seems  as  if  the  ten  years  of  the 


1  II.  viii.  563. 
8  Od.  xiv.  93. 


2  Od.  xiv.  20. 
4  II.  i.  252. 


544 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


war,  with  ten  of  preparation  preceding  them,  and  ten 
of  wanderings  which  follow,  were  intended  poetically  to 
make  up  this  whole,  so  that  an  entire  generation 
should  be  spent  upon  it.  Yet  the  first  of  the  three 
terms  would  appear  incapable  of  a  literal  interpreta- 
tion. We  may  be  sceptical  as  to  the  other  two  ;  but  it 
seems  clear,  that  the  Poet  could  hardly  have  intended 
us  to  believe  that  ten  years  were  expended  in  gathering 
the  force. 

Only  in  one  place  does  Homer  refer  to  any  actual 
process  of  reckoning.  He  describes  Proteus  counting 
his  seals  by  the  word  pempassetai.1  I  understand 
this  to  mean  no  more  than  that  he  reckoned  them  on 
his  five  fingers.  It  is  however  somewhat  remarkable, 
that  this  only  reference  to  any  part  or  element  of  the 
decimal  scale,  which  we  are  still  supposed  to  derive  from 
the  East,  should  be  found  upon  an  Eastern  scene,  and 
in  connection  with  a  personage  of  purely  Phoenician 
associations. 

Section  VII.     The  Sense  of  Color  in  Homer. 

In  the  '  Studies  on  Homer,'  I  have  considered  at 
some  length  the  manner  in  which  Homer  handles  the 
subject  of  color.  I  can  in  this  place  only  lay  down 
certain  propositions  without  attempting  the  proof  of 
them  in  detail. 

To  us  of  the  present  day,  color,  and  its  broader  dis- 
tinctions, are  familiar  from  childhood  upwards.  But, 
in  the  first  place,  it  is  to  be  borne  in  mind,  that  the  ac- 
quired knowledge  of  one  generation  becomes  in  time  the 


i  Od.  iv.  412,  451. 


MISCELLANEOUS. 


545 


inherited  aptitude  of  another.  In  the  second  place,  much 
of  our  varied  experience  in  color  is  due  to  chemistry, 
and  to  commerce,  which  brings  to  us  the  productions 
of  all  the  regions  of  the  world.  Mere  Nature,  at  any 
one  spot,  does  not  present  to  us  a  full  and  well-marked 
series  of  the  principal  colors  such  as  to  be  habitually 
before  the  mind's  eye.  Thirdly,  the  curious  investiga- 
tions1 of  late  years  have  shown  us  that,  even  now  and 
in  our  own  country,  no  inconsiderable  proportion  of 
persons  are  without  the  faculty  of  perceiving  some  of 
the  primary  distinctions  of  color. 

With  respect  to  Homer,  my  main  conclusions  are 

1.  That  his  perceptions  of  color,  considered  as  light 
decomposed,  though  highly  poetical,  are  also  very  in- 
determinate. 

2.  But  that  his  perceptions  of  light  not  decomposed, 
as  varying  between  light  and  dark,  white  and  black, 
were  most  vivid  and  effective. 

3.  That  accordingly  his  descriptions  of  color  gener- 
ally tend  a  good  deal  to  range  themselves  in  a  scale 
(so  to  speak)  of  degrees,  rather  than  of  kinds,  of 
light. 

The  primitive  experience  of  the  prismatic  colors  must 
have  been  principally  drawn  from  the  rainbow.  But 
Homer  only  once  mentions  the  rainbow,2  and  here  he 
compares  it  with  the  snakes  of  dark  metal  on  the  breast- 
plate of  Agamemnon ;  of  which  comparison  I  can  dis- 
cern no  other  ground  than  that "  they  would  flash  a 
varying  light  as  the  chieftain  moved. 

His  goddess  Iris  is  in  evident  relation  to  the  rain- 
bow.   Yet  he  never  gives  her  an  epithet  of  color ; 3 


1  See  Wilson  on  Color  Blindness. 
3  II.  viii.  398. 

35 


2*11.  xi.  27. 


546 


JUVENTUS  MUNDI. 


though  he  calls  her  golden-winged.  I  think  these  facts 
go  some  way  towards  proving  my  main  theses. 

There  are  no  words  in  Homer  which  can  with  any 
certainty  be  held  to  mean  any  one  of  these  three  colors : 
orange,  green,  and  blue.  His  word  kuaneos,  which 
is  more  like  indigo,  does  not  seem  to  have  been  clearly 
separated  in  his  mind  from  black ; 1  while  he  also  ap- 
plies it  to  wet  sand.2  His  word  porphureosfor  violet, 
runs  into  his  word  eruthros  for  red.  His  word  xan- 
thos  for  yellow  is  applied  to  auburn  or  red  hair,  to  the 
ears  of  corn,  to  a  chestnut  horse,  to  a  river  (apt  to  be 
swollen  I  suppose,  and  darkened  by  mud).  In  truth, 
there  is  not  one  single  epithet  of  color  which  we  can 
affirm  to  be  thoroughly  defined.  The  word  phoinix, 
which  seems  to  intermix  with  xanthos,  is  also  used 
as  the  equivalents  of  the  words  which  would  be  rendered 
purple  and  red.  Only  a  minute  examination  could  col- 
lect the  whole  evidence  in  the  case ;  but  I  will  close 
with  observing  that  oil  is  once  called  rosy,3  iron  and 
wool  violet,  and  oxen  wine-colored.  But  in  the  use  of 
the  words  white  and  black,  light  and  dark,  which  is 
abundant,  Homer's  eye  seems  rarely  or  never  to  go 
astray. 


1  See  II.  xxiv.  94. 


2  Od.  xii.  243. 


3  II.  xxiii.  186. 


INDEX. 


A 

Achaians,  who,  66 ;  epithets 
applied  to,  61 ;  local  force 
of  the  Achaian  name  in  the 
historic  ages,  65 ;  distinction 
between  them  and  the  other 
inhabitants  of  Greece,  66 ; 
Achaian  race  in  Crete,  67  ; 
closely  related  to  the  Pelopids, 
161 ;  the  Achaian  £  succumbs 
to  the  half-savage  Heraclid/ 
174. 

Achaiic  Argos,  48. 
Achaiis,  force  of  the  word,  46 
et  seq. 

Achilles,  lands  occupied  by  his 
contingent,  110 ;  his  power- 
ful denunciation  of  falsehood, 
389";  and  elevation  of  charac- 
ter, 389  ;  his  singular  courtesy, 
395,  425 ;  general  survey  of 
his  character  in  Homer,  500- 
502. 

Actoridai,  house  of  the,  137. 

Adultery,  crime  of,  held  in  ab- 
horrence, 398;  fine  imposed 
upon  the  adulterer,  414. 

Advent  of  our  Lord,  previous 
history  a  preparation  for  that 
event,  377. 

JEneas  and  the  title  'Anax  An- 
dron/ 162 ;  case  of  his  birth, 
372. 

Agamemnon  as  Anax  Andron, 
155 ;  account  of  his  sceptre, 
156 ;  and  of  his  extraction, 


157 ;  unjust  and  rapacious, 
393 ;  his  threat  in  regard  to 
Briseis,  411 ;  his  suzerainty 
over  other  princes,  420 ;  his 
succession  hereditary,  427.  See 
Polity,  Kings,  &c.  Descrip- 
tion of  Agamemnon  in  Homer, 
506. 

A'idoneus,  253  ;  obscurity  of  his 
figure,  253 ;  particulars  con- 
cerning, 254,  255 ;  Homeric 
adjustment  regarding  the  an- 
terior and  the  present  Olym- 
pian dynasty,  257. 

Aiguptioi,  the,  visited  by  Mene- 
laos,  126.    See  also  Egypt. 

Aiguptos,  an  Ithacan  noble,  126. 

Aiolids,  the  question  of  their 
Phoenician  origin  discussed, 
136. 

Aiolos,  a  Phoenician,  140  ;  force 
and  derivation  of  the  name, 
141. 

Ajax,  508. 

Anax  Andron,  151 ;  to  whom 
applied,  with  facts  relating  to 
the  phrase,  153  ;  the  term  dis- 
appears from  use  after  Homer, 
155 ;  title  applied  to  Aga- 
memnon, 155 ;  to  Anchises 
and  JEneas,  163 ;  title  a  sign 
of  affinity  between  the  Greeks 
and  the  Trojans,  166 ;  ap- 
plied to  Augeias,  167  ;  to  Eu- 
phetes,  170  ;  to  Eumelos,  171  ; 
a  title  probably  drawn  from  a 
more  patriarchal  state  of  so- 


548 


INDEX. 


ciety,  173 ;  what  it  specially 
denoted  was  some  primitive 
chiefship  or  superiority,  174. 

Anchises  and  the  title  '  Anax 
Andron/  162. 

Animal-worship,  361  ;  oxen  of 
the  sun,  361 ;  immortal  horses, 
362 ;  assumption  of  the  forms 
of  birds  by  deities,  362  ;  animal 
sacrifice,  363. 

Anthropomorphism,  Zeus  the 
type  of,  234 ;  the  principle  of 
Greek  religion,  363. 

Aphrodite,  313  ;  her  position,  and 
circumstances  concerning  her, 
313  ;  superintends  marriage  in 
its  physical  side,  314,  315 ;  re- 
ferable to  the  mythology  of  As- 
syria, 317. 

Apollo,  dignity  of,  271  ;  uniform 
identity  of  his  will  with  that 
of  Zeus,  275 ;  the  defender 
and  deliverer,  276.  See  also 
Athene  and  Apollo. 

Appellatives,  the  Three  Great, 
31 ;  evidence  of  chronological 
succession  among,  34. 

Approximation,  modes  of,  be- 
tween the  divine  and  the  hu- 
man- nature,  363. 

Arcadians,  the  Swiss  of  Greece, 
81. 

Ares,  296 ;  '  compound  of  deity 
and  brute/  296 ;  the  repre- 
sentative of  animal  force,  296  ; 
Homeric  evidence  concerning, 
298,  299 ;  probably  of  Pelas- 
gian  and  elemental  origin,  300. 

Argos,  significance  of  the  name, 
34  ;  Achaiic  Argos,  48  ;  Iasian 
Argos,  49 ;  name  applied  to 
three  settlements,  50 ;  a  plain 
country,  51 ;  put  sometimes 
for  Greece  at  large,  51  ;  re- 
capitulation of  its  four  uses, 
52  ;  used  adjectively,  54  ;  force 
of  the  word  ( Argeioi,'  35 ; 
poetic  and  archaic  name,  43 ; 
its  possible  local  use,  45. 

Army,  432  et  seq. ;  ranks  trace- 
able in,  433  ;  privates  of,  433  ; 
nature  of  the  arms  employed, 
433 ;  two  modes  of  fighting, 
434. 


Art,  works  of,  obtained  from 
Phoenicia,  124  ;  idea  of  art  in 
Homer,  525  ;  works  of  art,  525  ; 
materials  thereof,  526  ;  range 
of,  526  ;  seat  of  art,  523  ;  Egyp- 
tian and  Assyrian  schools  of, 
529. 

Artemis,  305 ;  a  reflection  of 
Apollo,  305  ;  relation  of  to  the 
elemental  system,  306,  307; 
great  inferiority  of  to  Apollo, 
309  ;  ministry  of  death,  320 ; 
rival  of  Aphrodite  in  matter  of 
beauty,  320. 

Assemblies,  Homeric,  432  ;  centre 
of  the  life  of  the  community, 
438 ;  opposing  factions  in  the, 
439  ;   Trojan  Assembly,  469. 

Ate,  the  temptress,  356  ;  eldest 
daughter  of  Zeus,  357 ;  re- 
semblance between  this  Greek 
allegory  and  the  representation 
of  the  Serpent  in  Scripture, 
357  ;  examples  of  her  agency, 
358.  ^ 

Athene,  highest  intelligence  of 
Olympian  deities,  211  ;  relation 
of  rank  between  Here  and 
her,  270. 

Athene  and  Apollo,  268 ;  their 
position  explained  by  Hebrew 
tradition,  269 ;  their  sanctitas 
superior  to  that  of  Zeus,  272 ; 
never  deceived  or  put  to 
shame,  273  ;  epithet  '  dear ' 
applied  by  Zeus  to  them,  274. 

Augeias,  and  the  title  '  Anax 
Andron,'  167. 

Autochthonism,  or  birth  from 
the  soil,  33. 

B. 

Balance  of  forces,  political, 
unknown  to  Homer,  419. 

Basileus,  as  a  designation  of  dig- 
nity, 152 ;  use  of  the  term  in 
the  Odyssey,  445.  See  King, 
Polity,  &c. 

Beauty,  admiration  of  the  poet 
for,  402 ;  moral  purity  of  the 
idea,  402;  Idea  of  Beauty  in 
Homer,  521. 

Blood,  recognition  of  the  tie  of,  402 . 


INDEX. 


549 


Boule,  or  Council,  434. 
Briareus,  839. 
Briseis,  409,  410. 

C. 

Calypso,  situation  of  the  island 
of,  486. 

Cannibalism,  399. 

Catalogues,  the,  471-474. 

'  Chorizontes 5  —  those  who  main- 
tain a  separate  authorship  — 14 
et  seq. 

Chruses,  64. 

Color,  sense  of  in  Homer,  544. 
Concubinage  of  rare  occurrence, 
411. 

Conscience,  voice  of  recognized, 
386. 

Courtesy,  fine  example  of  in 
Achilles,  395,  425. 

Crete,  Pelasgian  character  of  its 
population,  90 ;  races  inhabit- 
ing, 90 ;  base  of  Achaian  war- 
like effort  against  Egypt,  146. 


D. 

Danaos,  40  et  seq. ;  Danae,  40  ; 
Danaoi,  36 ;  military  character 
of  the  epithets  applied  to,  36  ; 
probable  conclusions  respect- 
ing the  name,  42. 

Data  for  constructing  Map  of 
the  '  Outer  Geography/  482. 

Date  of  Homer,  3  ;  of  the  fall  of 
Troy,  3. 

Debate,  Homeric,  437. 

Delicacy  of  Homer,  403. 

Demeter,  262 ;  epithets  and  Ho- 
meric evidence,  263  et  seq.; 
etymology  of,  266 ;  a  figure 
partly  Hellenized,  partly  Pe- 
lasgian, 266. 

Demioergoi,  the,  443. 

Demodocos,  2,  5. 

Destiny,  binding  efficacy  of,  350. 
See  Fate. 

Diomed,  Homer's  description  of, 
508  ;  exchange  of  arms  with 
Glaucos,  402. 

Dione,  266 ;  of  the"  family  of 
Nature  Powers,  267. 


Dionusos,  319 ;  slight  and  ob- 
scure traditions  concerning, 
319 ;  recency  of  his  worship, 
321 ;  Dionusian  orgies,  322 ; 
within  the  circle  of  Phoenician 
traditions,  322. 

Distances,  Homer's  measures  of, 
483. 

Doom,  ministers  of,  349,  358. 
Dorian  conquest,  effect  of,  4. 

E. 

Egypt,  somewhat  narrow  di- 
rect notices  of  in  the  Poems, 
126;  Egyptian  Thebes,  126; 
drug  presented  to  Helen,  126  ; 
Egyptians,  127  etseq. ;  Egyptian 
chronology,  143 ;  Achaian  in- 
vasion of  Egypt,  146 ;  zenith 
of  the  Egyptian  power,  147. 

Elysian  Plain,  the,  374. 

Ephure,  169. 

Erinues,  218,  350 ;  action  and 
functions  of,  352  et  seq. ;  deri- 
vation of  the  name,  356. 

Ethics  of  the  Heroic  Age,  381 ; 
connection  between  duty  and 
religious  belief  and  reverence, 
384. 

Eumelos,  171. 

Euphetes,  270. 

F. 

Eate  or  Doom,  358 ;  explana- 
tion of  the  words  (Ker,  Moira, 
&c.)  expressing  this  idea,  358- 
361. 

Filiation,  Divine,  367. 
Food,  129. 

Fraud,  element  of  in  Homer, 
212 ;  tenderness  for  fraud  the 
weakest  point  in  Homer,  388 ; 
case  of  Diomed  and  the  oxen 
of  Glaucos,  389. 

Future  State,  Homeric  view  of, 
373 ;  its  threefold  division, 
374. 

G. 

Genealogies    of    the  Cata- 
logue, 472. 
Geography  of  Homer,  471 ;  Ho- 


550 


INDEX. 


meric  division  of  the  Greek 
territory,  472 ;  Geography  of 
the  Plain  of  Troy,  474  ;  '  Outer 
Geography/  479  ;  data  for  con- 
structing an  Homeric  Map  of 
the  Outer  Geography,  482. 
Gods,  classification  of,  218,  219. 
See  also  the  deities  under  their 
several  headings.  Consult  also 
Religion. 

Greek  life  in  the  Heroic  Age, 
sketch  of,  405. 

Greeks  of  the  Iliad,  their  ordi- 
nary appellations,  33 ;  moral 
character  of  the  Homeric 
Greeks,  381. 

H. 

Hebe,  327 ;  office  exclusively 
Olympian,  328 ;  probably  a 
purely  ideal  conception,  328. 

Hebrew  idea  of  a  Deliverer  re- 
flected in  Homer,  210 ;  story 
of  Joseph  and  the  Greek  le- 
gend of  Bellerophon,  203 ; 
concerning  the  punishment  of 
Rebellious  Powers,  349 ;  con- 
cerning the  Serpent  and  the 
Greek  Ate,  357. 

Hebrew  traditions  concerning 
the  Messiah,  205,  206. 

Hector,  513-516. 

Helen,  509-513. 

Helios,  a  person,  323;  appears 
with  more  marked  effect  in 
the  Odyssey  rather  than  in  the 
Iliad,  323;  oxen  of  the  Sun, 
324;  an  Eastern  god,  incor- 
poration of  the  Sun  with  the 
Trojan  Apollo,  325. 

Hellas,  110  ;  its  derivatives,  110. 

Hephaistos,  character,  functions, 
and  instances  of  his  operation, 
291  et  seq. 

Heracles,  character  of,  383. 

Here,  236-243  et  passim. 

Hermes,  301 ;  secondary  part 
played  by,  301 ;  functions 
point  to  a  Phoenician  source, 
303 ;  an  agent  rather  than  a 
mere  messenger,  304;  con- 
nected with  the  East  by 
Welcker,  305. 


Hesiod  and  Homer,  comparative 
antiquity  of,  27  ;  contrast  be- 
tween the  theologies  of,  177. 

Homer,  influence  of  his  works, 
1 ;  his  blindness,  2  ;  date  at 
which  he  lived,  3  ;  place  of  his 
birth  and  residence,  6 ;  his 
poetry  historic,  7  ;  historic  also 
with  regard  to  his  chief  events 
and  persons,  7  ;  theurgy  of  his 
Poems  self-subsistent,  9 ;  spe- 
cial feature  of  his  Poems  in 
the  delineation  of  personal 
character,  10, 11  ;  obscurity  re- 
specting the  Iliad  and  Odyssey, 
12 ;  discussion  of  the  question 
of  the  unity  of  his  Poems,  13 
et  seq.  Consult  also  Iliad,  and 
cognate  headings.  Text  of  the 
Poems,  23;  plots,  characters, 
and  similes  of  the  Poems,  495. 

Homicide,  387. 

Houses,  pedigree  of  the  ancient 

Greek,  368. 
Hymns,  the  Homeric,  discussed, 

12;  their  inferiority,  13. 


I. 

Iliad,  influence  of  on  modern 
life,  1 ;  plot  of  compared  with 
the  plot  of  the  Odyssey,  17 ; 
careful  preservation  of  the  text, 
23  ;  plot  of,  496  ;  main  steps  of 
his  action,  497.  See  various 
headings  :  Homer,  Sense  of 
Beauty  in  Homer,  Use  of  Num- 
ber, &c.  &c. 

Ionians,  81,  85  et  seq. 

Iris,  332;  her  office,  333;  the 
rainbow,  334 ;  instances  of  her 
action,  334  et  seq. 


J. 

Justice,  sense  of,  393. 


K. 

Kadmos,  123 ;  etymology  of  his 
name,  136. 


INDEX. 


551 


Kephallenes,  115. 

Kimmeria,  derivation  of  the 
name,  494. 

King  of  kings,  or  Suzerain,  the 
position  of  Agamemnon,  433. 

Kings,  Homeric,  personal  reve- 
rence for,  418 ;  a  distinct  class, 
420 ;  stand  in  a  special  relation 
to  deity,  421 ;  personal  vigor  of, 
422 ;  skill  in  the  games,  423 ; 
gifts  of  music  and  song,  424 ; 
manual  employments  of,  424; 
Judge,  General,  and  Priest, 
424 ;  succession  of  hereditary, 
426 ;  testimony  of  the  Olym- 
pian arrangements  to  the  higher 
dignity  and  authority  of  the 
elder  brother,  428 ;  King  as 
priest,  428;  Judge,  429;  as  a 
great  proprietor,  430;  hospi- 
tality expected  from,  431  ; 
might  obtain  private  property, 
431 ;  lax  law  of  kingly  succes- 
sion in  Troy,  466,  467. 

Kudones,  of  Pelasgian  origin,  90. 


L. 

Larisse,  77,  78. 

'Law/  no  word  for  in  Homer, 
446 ;  substitutes  for,  447 ;  five- 
fold basis  of  society,  452. 

Leleges,  who,  91. 

Leto,  259;  epithets  ascribed  to 
her,  259;  her  action  circum- 
scribed, 259;  high  ascriptions 
of  her  dignity,  260 ;  etymology 
of  her  name,  261 ;  a  record  of 
the  Hebrew  tradition  regard- 
ing the  Deliverer,  262. 

Logos,  the,  210. 


M. 

Marriage.  No  clear  instance  of 
a  married  deity,  save  Zeus, 
216 ;  Homeric  marriage,  409- 
415 ;  strictness  of  the  law  con- 
cerning, 410;  restraints  im- 
posed upon,  412. 

Medium  of  exchange,  450. 

Memnon,  an  Egyptian,  149. 


Menelaos.    See    Helen,  Paris, 

Marriage. 
Messiah,  The,  Hebrew  tradition 

respecting,  205 ;  the  Deliverer, 

210. 

Metals  in  Homer,  533;  those 
used  in  the  shield,  533;  Homer 
ignorant  of  the  fusing  or  cast- 
ing of  metals,  535;  chalcos, 
535 ;  kuanos,  537 ;  list  and 
value  of  the  metals,  538. 

Minos,  his  Phoenician  character, 
120  et  seq. 

Moderation,  the  base  of  a  model 
man  in  Homer,  396. 

Music  probably  introduced  by 
the  Phoenicians,  134. 

Myrmidons,  of  Hellenic  and 
Achaian  race,  106. 


N. 

Names  applied  to  the  Greeks 
of  the  Iliad,  33 ;  derivation  of 
national  or  tribal  names,  37 ; 
derivation  of  names  of  coun- 
tries and  places,  53 ;  names, 
Greek  and  Trojan,  104;  local 
concatenation  of  names  of 
places,  118. 

Nature,  modes  of  approximation 
between  the  divine  and  the 
human,  363  ;  four  main  chan- 
nels of  approach,  373. 

Nature  Powers,  346  ;  communi- 
cation of  the  human  Dead  with, 
376  ;  worshipped  in  Troas,  456. 
See  Religion. 

Nemesis,  386. 

Nereus,  the  sea-god,  245,  347. 
Nestor,  9,  35,  436  ;  his  age,  543. 
Number,  use  of  in  Homer,  540- 

544. 
Nymphs,  348. 


O. 

Oath,  peculiar  importance  of, 
446. 

Odysseus,  68;  Phoenician  ele- 
ment in  his  fictions,  125,  127 ; 
notices  concerning,  128,  146, 


552 


INDEX. 


323,  324 ;  his  characteristic 
virtue  of  patience,  392;  his 
self-command,  396 ;  his  filial 
sentiment  towards  Laertes,  401, 
403,  422,  424 ;  his  profound  re- 
finement, 425 ;  eloquence  of, 
436  ;  state  of  society  in  Ithaca, 
445  ;  several  stages  of  the  voy- 
age of  Odysseus,  488 ;  Homer's 
portraiture  of  Odysseus,  502. 

Odyssey.  See  other  headings  : 
Homer,  Chorizontes,  Iliad,  &c. 
Plot  of  the  Odyssey  character- 
ized, 496. 

Olympian  system,  176,  346  ;  clas- 
sification of  various  preternat- 
ural personages,  346  et  seq.  : 
see  Religion,  Approximation,  Ani- 
mal- Worship,  Future  State :  Re- 
sults of  the  Olympian  system, 
377  ;  its  character,  378. 

Oratory,  Homeric,  437. 

'  Outer  Geography/  the,  479 ; 
data  for  constructing  map  of, 
482. 

P. 

Paiaist,  hymn  to  Apollo,  332. 

Paieon,  Egyptians  of  the  race  of, 
125,  330;  singular  relation  be- 
tween Paieon  and  Apollo,  332. 

Panachaioi,  70. 

Panhellenes,  force  of  the  word, 
114. 

Parents  and  children,  profound 
natural  attachment  between, 
400. 

Paris,  383,  462;  Homer's  char- 
acter of,  510-513. 

Patience,  exalted  view  of,  in  the 
Homeric  ethics,  392. 

Pelasgians,  epithet '  dioi,'  76  ;  di- 
rect notices  concerning,  73- 
78 ;  other  heads  of  Homeric 
evidence  relating  to  them,  78 
et  seq. ;  etymology  of  the  name, 
94 ;  words  common  to  the 
Greek  and  Latin  languages  are 
Pelasgian,  96 ;  lists  of  these 
words,  97  et  seq.;  extra-Ho- 
meric evidence  touching  the 
wide  extension  of  the  Pelasgoi, 
107. 


Pelasgicos,  the  archaic  name  of 
Zeus,  74. 

Penelope.    See  Odysseus. 

Persephone,  311 ;  epithets  applied 
to  her,  311  ;  co-ruler  with  A'i- 
doneus,  312 ;  representative  of 
the  old  Pelasgian  tradition,  312  ; 
etymology  of,  312. 

Phaiakes,  people  of  Scherie  (Cor- 
fu), were  Phoenicians,  133. 

Phoenicians  (the)  and  the  Egypt- 
ians, 119;  Minos  a  Phoenician, 
120;  Kadmos,  Daidalos,  123; 
Phoenician  works  of  art,  124 ; 
Greeks  dependent  on  Phoeni- 
cians for  intercourse  with  the 
outer  world,  126 ;  points  of 
contrast  between  the  Phoeni- 
cian and  Hellenic  world,  129 ; 
meaning  of  the  word  'Phoeni- 
cia' in  its  widest  sense,  130; 
building,  use  of  hewn  stone, 
&c,  a  Phoenician  art,  132 ;  art 
of  music  probably  introduced 
by  the  Phoenicians,  134  ;  Phoe- 
nicianism  of  the  Aiolids,  138  ; 
some  Phoenician  personages 
also  called  Sidonian,  144 ;  in- 
tercourse of  the  Phoenicians 
with  the  Jews,  202;  tales  of 
the  Odyssey  having  a  Phoe- 
nician origin,  203 ;  Poseidon 
a  Phoenician  god,  250;  Phoe- 
nicians brought  into  Greece 
the  Assyrian  planetary  wor- 
ship, 315;  dependence  of  the 
Greeks  on  the  Phoenicians  for 
metals,  537.  See  also  Voyage 
of  Odysseus  and  Art. 

Phthie,  significance  of  the  terri- 
torial name,  112. 

Physics  of  Homer,  525-528. 

Plots,  characters,  and  similes  of 
the  Poems,  495. 

Polity  of  the  Heroic  Age,  417 ; 
resemblance  between  the  Ho- 
meric and  our  own  ideas,  417  ; 
personal  reverence  for  sover- 
eigns, 418 ;  qualifications  pre- 
venting excesses,  418;  no  'bal- 
ance of  forces,'  419  ;  reciprocal 
duty,  419 ;  Homeric  kings,  420  ; 
leading  political  ideas  exhib- 
ited in  the  Poems,  452.  See 


INDEX. 


553 


also    Kings,  Army,    Assembly,  \ 
Council. 
Polygamy  of  Priam,  465. 

Poseidon,  243 ;  his  character,  ! 
248 ;  not  an  elemental  deity, 
245  ;  prayer  how  addressed  to 
Mm,  246  ;   functions  of,  247  ; 
Greek  legends  respecting,  248  ;  j 
instances  of  his  action,  249 ;  i 
his  working  supremacy  in  the 
Odyssey,  250 ;   prevalence  of  ! 
his  worship  among  the  Phoe- 
nicians,  251 ;  special  attributes, 
252. 

Priam,  465 ;  his  sons,  466 ;  suze- 
rainty over  subordinate  dis- 
tricts, 468. 

Priests,  no  professional,  428 ; 
king  as  priest,  428,  429 ;  the 
Trojan  priesthood,  460. 

Proitos,  131. 

K. 

Rainbow  in  Scripture  and  in 
Homer,  210. 

Rebellious  Powers,  the,  349. 

Recensions  (state)  of  Homer,  23. 

Recitations  (state)  of  the  Ho- 
meric poems,  22. 

Religion  of  Greece,  its  varie- 
gated aspect,  178  ;  conflict  of 
religions,  and  conflict  between 
Nature-worship  and  the  Ho- 
meric system,  179 ;  the  two 
religions  :  instances  of  amalga- 
mation or  expulsion  of  deities, 
180 ;  character  of  the  Olym- 
pian system,  181 ;  its  debase- 
ment, 182 ;  devoid,  of  author- 
ity, 183 ;  had  no  priesthood, 
183 ;  its  prevailing  character 
humanitarian,  184 ;  influence 
of  the  popular  and  of  the  philo- 
sophic mind  upon  the  system, 
184 ;  two  simultaneous  pro- 
cesses of  a  speculative  as- 
cent and  a  practical  decline, 
186  ;  Plato's  reproaches  against 
Homer's  treatment  of  the  gods 
baseless,  187  ;  principal  mate- 
rials of  the  Homeric  religion, 
188  ;  Homer's  mode  of  dealing 
with  the  elder  Nature  Powers, 


189 ;  vestiges  of  the  earlier  sys- 
tem, 191  ;  relation  between  the 
older  and  the  younger  schemes, 
194 ;  Homeric  mythology  to 
be  severed  also  from  the  Roman 
mythology  and  the  mythology 
of  classical  Greece,  195 ;  the 
polity  of  the  system  framed  on 
the  human  model,  195  ;  hete- 
rogeneity discernible  among 
members  of  the  Olympian 
court,  196  et  seg. ;  classification 
of  the  Olympian  personages, 
200 ;  limitations  and  liabilities 
among  the  gods,  201 ;  marked 
correspondence  between  certain 
legends  and  the  Hebrew  tradi- 
tions conveyed  in  the  books  of 
Scripture,  202  ;  Hebrew  tradi- 
tion respecting  the  Messiah, 
205,  206 ;  origin  of  Pagan  re- 
ligions :  opinions  of  St.  Paul, 
Eusebius,  and  others,  206  ;  ma- 
chinery of  the  Homeric  poems, 
207  ;  idea,  in  Homer,  of  a  De- 
liverer and  tradition  of  an  Evil 
Being,  210 ;  grand  distinction 
between  Homeric  and  later  sys- 
toms,  214 ;  collective  and  indi- 
vidual action  of  the  gods,  214  ; 
distinction  between  the  Greek 
and  Trojan  religions,  456.  See 
Olympian  system,  and  the  deities 
under  their  several  designa- 
tions. 

Resemblances  and  differences  be- 
tween the  Greeks  and  the  Tro- 
jans, 455. 

Reverence,  the  formative  idea  of 
Greek  society,  453  ;  reverence 
for  parents,  for  kings,  for  the 
poor,  &c,  454. 

River,  Homer's  notion  of  a  great 
circumfluent  (Okeanos),  493. 

River-worship,  192.  See  Religion  ; 
also  Nature-worship. 


S. 

Sacrifices,  animal,  363. 
Sanscrit,  names  of  Hellenic  dei- 
ties derivable  from,  345  note. 
Scherie  (Corfu),  70. 


554 


INDEX. 


Sellos,  Selloi,  explanation  of  the 

words,  116. 
Sidon,  144. 

Similes  of  the  Poems,  513-521. 
Sin,  390. 

Sketch  of  Greek  life  in  the  Heroic 
age,  405. 

Slavery,  not  a  prominent  feature 
of  Greek  society  in  Homer, 
448 ;  war  and  kidnapping  the 
two  sources  for  supplying 
slaves,  448 ;  mitigated  char- 
acter of  Homeric  slavery,  449. 

Society,  five-fold  basis  of,  449. 

Sun.  See  Helios.  Oxen  of  the 
sun,  188,  323. 


T. 

Tartaros,  376. 

Text  of  the  Poems  carefully  pre- 
served, 23. 

Thebes,  the,  of  Kadmos,  124; 
Egyptian  Thebes,  126. 

Themis,  329 ;  deification  of  an 
impersonated  idea,  330  ;  Hahn's 
derivation  of  the  word,  330. 

Thetis,  336  ;  of  elemental  origin, 
336  ;  her  rank,  338 ;  marriage 
to  Peleus,  338  ;  principal  par- 
ticulars concerning  her,  342; 
epithets  applied  to  her,  344 ; 
character  of  the  later  traditions 
concerning,  344. 

Tis,  the  Greek  Public  Opinion, 
441 ;  primary  ancestor  of  the 
famous   Greek   Chorus,  442 ; 

Tradition.-  See  Hebrew  Tradition. 

Trinity,  210 ;  and  the  trident  of 
Poseidon,  251,  252. 

Trojans,  religious  system  of  the, 
459  et  seq. ;  excelled  the  Greeks 
in  religious  observance,  462 ; 
inferior  to  the  Greeks  in  mo- 


rality, 462;  polygamy  of  Priam, 
465;  lax  succession  of  their 
kings,  465  ;  Trojan  Assembly, 
469. 

Troy,  Geography  of  the  Plain 
of,  474-479. 


U. 

Underworld,  the,  375. 
Unity  of  authorship,  14. 


V. 

Value,  measure  of,  in  Homer, 

538-540. 
Voyage  of    Odysseus,  several 

stages  of  the,  488. 


W. 

'  Will  and  Ought,'  217,  350, 
351. 

Wolf,  Professor,  his  argument,  14. 

Woman,  her  position,  409  ;  mar- 
riage, 409-415 ;  whether  ca- 
pable of  political  sovereignty, 
415;  domestic  employment  of, 
415,  416. 

Z. 

Zetjs,  221 ;  formed  in  many  points 
upon  the  conception  of  the  One 
and  Supreme  God,  221  ;  his  five 
capacities,  his  epithets  and  ver- 
bal ascriptions,  222  ;  the  Pelas- 
gian  Zeus,  223 ;  the  Divine 
Zeus,  225 ;  the  Olympian  Zeus 
and  Lord  of  Air,  228, 229  ;  Zeus, 
the  type  of  anthropomorphism, 
234. 


Cambridge :  Printed  by  Jobn  Wilson  and  Son. 


