epeeretitst® ea at 
ἩΠΠΕΒΤ ata 


eigatarorr 


Sagi ese roeeree 
SS ESI TIE 


E vOl9cStO LOLI € 


il til 


OLNOHOL 4O ALISHSAINN 


Sees saesees : ; ἐπ τε; τὴς ; z ᾿ = : Sesisices 


THE RISE OF 


THE GREEKRVEPIG 


Mosae4- jit 
THE RISE OF 


ΠΗ GREEK fPIC 


BEING A COURSE OF LECTURES DELIVERED 
AT HARVARD UNIVERSITY 


BY 


GILBERT MURRAY 


REGIUS PROFESSOR OF GREEK IN THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD 


THIRD EDITION 


REVISED AND ENLARGED 


OXF ORD 
AT RIE -CELARENDON:, PRESS 
1924 


Oxford University Press 
London Edinburgh Glasgow Copenhagen 
New York Toronto Melbourne Cape Town 
Bombay Calcutta Madras Shanghai 


Humphrey Milford Publisher to the University 


PRINTED IN ENGLAND 
AT THE OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS 


PREP AY C.B 
TO tHe -THikD EDITION 


THIS edition contains, besides a good deal of revision in detail, 
some new material on the historic background of Homeric myths 
and new illustration of the traditional book by the analogy of 
stage plays, as well as a small additional appendix. My general 
attitude towards Homeric problems remains much the same 
as I have explained in the Preface to the Second Edition, though 
I hope that, in spite of the War and the League of Nations, I 
have learnt something more about Homer in the last ten years. 

In that period the analysis of the poems has been treated by 
two acknowledged masters, Wilamowitz and Bethe.’ It is 
worth noting that while agreeing in general view and method 
they differ greatly in their particular conclusions. That result 
indicates, in my opinion, not that the method is faulty but that 
the available evidence is insufficient. It can show us, as I have 
said elsewhere, the kind of thing that must have happened ; it 
can seldom tell us the exact thing that did happen. Dr. Leaf’s 
Troy (1912) and Homer and History (1915), though much in 
both of them fails to convince me, have added greatly to our 
knowledge of Homeric geography, and show all the lucidity and 
grip of real life which specially distinguish their author among 
learned men. From Professor Chadwick I have learnt at last to 
understand what a ‘ Heroic Age’ really is, an invaluable lesson 
for Greek scholars. From Professor J. A. K. Thomson I have 
had real help in the imaginative understanding of Homeric 
poetry, and in particular of the relations of the bard to the chorus, 
The ninth and tenth chapters of his Studzes 711 the Odyssey 
appear to me to have brought light into the very heart of what 
is specially called ‘the Homeric Question’, From him also I 
have adopted the conception of the Achaioi as a north-western 
tribe, forerunners of the Dorians, and quite distinct from the 

\ Die Ilias und Homer, by U. von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff (1916, 1920) ; 
Homer, Dichtung und Saga, by Erich Bethe. ///as 1914: Odyssee, &c., 1923. 


2760 


\<\ 


vi PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION 


older Greek civilization, which was the parent of Acolian and 
Ionian. This view, based chiefly on the evidence of the three 
independent groups of Achaean inscriptions, was also suggested 
by Chadwick and has been adopted by many later writers. It is 
not in any way essential to my general position, but it seems 
to me to account for the facts better than any other current 
hypothesis. 

My belief in the importance of the Attic element in the poems 
is in general, though not in detailed, agreement with the position 
taken by such writers as Cauer, Bethe, and Milder, and has lately 
been confirmed by the striking Sprachliche Untersuchungen of 
Wackernagel (1916). 

Among critics who take a radically different view from mine, 
I have learned most from Drerup (Das Homerproblem in der 
Gegenwart, 1921, being vol. 1 of a large work on Homerische 
Poettk). The masses of interesting material which he has 
collected and the acuteness of his historical arguments console 
one for the over-polemical tone of what he openly calls a 
‘Kriegsbuch’. In this connexion I would fain pay a tribute to 
the Grundfragen of the lamented Paul Cauer, of which the third 
edition lies before me, a work which, apart from its learning, 
seems to me to acquire real beauty by its patient candour and 
reasonableness. 

I rejoice to find myself more in agreement with Mr. T. W. 
Allen’s learned and ingenious book, 7he Homeric Catalogue 
of Ships (1921), than I had expected beforehand. Mr. Allen at 
least regards the Catalogue as an ancient non-Homeric document, 
originally composed for another context and, in spite of additions 
and omissions, still bearing clear marks of its origin, and I see 
with sympathy that he has brought down upon himself the wrath 
of a more perfect ‘unitarian’, Drerup, by these dangerous 
concessions to human reason. But there is one point of principle 
on which I think that he has overstated his case. He treats the 
Catalogue as a legal document, and argues that any alteration in 
it which may have occurred in the course of ages must be no 
mere corruption, such as is common in literary texts, but a 
‘forgery made with a material and quasi-legal purpose’. Such 
a view appears to me to rest on a misunderstanding, and I have 
discussed it in Appendix J. 


EREPACE TO THE THIRD: EDITION vil 


The last few years have produced several new and interesting 
studies of the peculiarities of Homeric style in narrative, in similes, 
and in the almost impossible task of describing battles... It 
would be quite easy, of course, to attribute them all to the 
personal tastes of a hypothetical individual. One critic, for 
instance, postulates a poet who knew several dialects and was 
proud of mixing them, and who also enjoyed making fun of the 
gods. But, as Jebb emphasized long ago, the thing to be 
explained is not a personal taste but a tradition. An eccentric 
Homer is an impossibility. A tradition is a social fact, based on 
the unspoken agreement of poets and audiences, from which 
neither can vary widely or abruptly. And the problem to be 
understood is how and why through many generations the 
normal Greek public expected its epic poets to speak in a 
particular artificial dialect, to use a particular type of simile and 
description, and to obey certain subtle and probably unconscious 
rules of symmetry. Certainly the artistic instinct implied in both 
poet and audience by these facts is very remarkable, but perhaps 
not more so than the exquisite conventions of symmetry and 
proportion which were traditional in other forms of Greek art, 
for instance in architecture and the carving of bas-reliefs. 


GoM. 
Curist CHURCH, OxForD, 


July 1924. 


' See the authors quoted in Cauer, Grundjragen, 111. 5, to whom may be 
added Shorey in C/ass. Phil, July 1922; Fraenkel, Homerische Gleichnisse, 
1921 (which however I have not seen), and J. Τὶ Sheppard, 7he Pattern of 
the Iliad, 1923. See also the bibliography by Milder in Korte’s Jahres- 
bericht tiber die Fortschritte der kl. Altertumswissenschaft, Vol. 182 (1920, 
1), with his trenchant but over-subjective criticisms. 


PO RoE Ee ACC 
LO THE: SECOND EDITION 


IN preparing this second edition I should like to thank several 
friends for notes and suggestions, among them Mr. E. E. Genner, 
Professor Cruickshank, Mr. J. A. K. Thomson, and Mr. Andrew 
Lang. I have also derived profit from some of my reviews, both 
English and foreign. 

It was vain, I suppose, to hope that even the most pacific and 
wary walking would take one far into Homeric territory without 
rousing the old lions that lie wakeful behind most of the larger 
stones. I have listened with mixed feelings to their threatening 
voices. The sportsman within me would like to go gun in hand 
and bag a few of the most dangerous; the philosopher is resolved 
to do them no injury, but merely try, gradually and indirectly, to 
make them friends to man. While still avoiding controversy, 
therefore, I have tried in this edition to state more clearly or 
correctly or patiently a number of arguments which seem to 
have given trouble in the first; I have in many places added 
or altered a word or two in view of fresh evidence; especially 
I have added a new chapter on the known history of the Homeric 
text. The rest of my book proceeds mainly in historical order, 
and deals largely with regions in which there is no record; this 
new chapter reverses that order and reaches back, step by step, 
from the known to the unknown. 

I am anxious to find common ground with my unitarian critics. 
I only differ irreconcilably from those who reject all analysis ad 
7nitzo ; who assume as an unquestioned starting-point that, towards 
the end of the second millennium B.C., when to the best of our 
knowledge there was no Greek literature, a single miraculously 
gifted man, of whose life we know nothing, living in the heart of 
a rich, widespread, and romantic civilization, which no history 
mentions and all excavation has signally failed to discover, com- 
posed for an audience unable to read two poems much too long 
to be listened to; and then managed by miraculous but un- 


PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION ix 


specified means to secure that his poems should be preserved 
practically unaltered while flying viva per ora virum through 
some six extraordinarily changeful centuries. These stalwarts 
do not wish to be persuaded or argued with. But for the rest 
of us a meeting-ground is possibly within sight. If the Z/ad is 
a traditional book, in which old material has been reshaped by 
later bards—whether we suppose a gradual development of a 
Trojan story or an Achilles story, or a fictional reshaping of old 
poetry which had originally nothing to do with Achilles nor yet 
with Troy, or all these together—the difference between Wolfians 
and unitarians is really one of degree. 

Of course the /#ad is a unity. Every successful version of 
a traditional poem is that. Every new poet who recited and 
thereby modified the 7/ad produced or meant to produce a 
unity. Nay, the very arguments which are used to prove 
a complex growth in the past will serve to prove a unity in 
the present. For almost every discrepancy or awkwardness is 
deliberately smoothed out and reconciled. There are no naked 
impossibilities, there are no crude and unpalliated contradictions. 
The poets who worked upon the //ad were too good artists for 
that. Wherever we can discern the tracks of the ‘ Diaskeuastés’ 
we can nearly always discern also the pains he has taken to 
conceal his tracks. 

The original substratum is a vera causa: the poem as a whole 
cannot be conceived without it. The reshaping by later poets 
or editors is a vera causa: it is demonstrated by the history of 
the text. The task of the unitarian, then, is, somewhere between 
the first sources of the 7/zad and the last additions, to find some 
one poet whose work utterly surpasses that of all who came 
before or after him. For my own part, I leave that quest to 
scholars of more confident temper ; the little I have to say about 
it will be found on pp. 238 ff. 

The subject of Homeric language needs a few words to itself, 
both because of the good recent work done upon it (see p. 168 f.) 
and because the questions at issue are often misunderstood. The 
cardinal fact about the language is the extraordinary mixture in 
it of old and new, in forms, in constructions, in manners of thought. 
This mixture has, of course, been explained in various ways; to 
me it is merely the natural mark and stamp of a Traditional 


x PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION 


Book, preserved, renewed, conventionalized, and unconsciously 
modified—always within the limits of the convention—by many 
successive generations of reciters. 

But the critics of thirty years ago were apt sometimes to go 
wrong by not recognizing the complexity of the problem before 
them, and trying by means of the language to determine the 
comparative date of particular books as wholes, or of the two 
poems as wholes. It is true that there are differences of style; 
slight but decided differences, which every good scholar, however 
he may explain them, feels. But it is impossible to cut out any 
large section of the poems clean and say: ‘ Every line of this is 
written in language of a particular date. On the hypothesis 
which I follow, of course, any such expectation would be un- 
scientific. The mixture of old and new is all-pervasive. The 
oldest parts have passed through the lips of scores of later poets ; 
the latest parts—even the most confessedly apocryphal additions 
of the ‘wild papyri’—are largely made up of old lines and 
phrases, and are always composed in the old convention. 

Any satisfactory examination of the language statistics must 
bear these considerations in mind and realize the difficulty of its 
task. It must never be satisfied with merely counting unanalysed 
phenomena. It must always dig below the ‘ surface corruption ’. 
It must never use repeated or inorganic lines as if they were 
necessarily original or organic in the place where they happen 
now to stand. It must take full account of differences of subject 
as naturally producing differences of vocabulary. And it must 
of necessity, if it is to do much good, practise an extreme deli- 
cacy of sensitiveness to language. When the whole poem has 
been uniformly clothed in conventional epic diction, when each 
rhapsode has deliberately written to the best of his powers in 
‘Homeric’ language, it is only by a delicacy of observation 
surpassing his that we can hope to detect his deviations from 
standard. This sounds very difficult ; but it has often been done. 
After all, we scholars have unlimited time: and the rhapsodes, 
though skilful, were unsuspicious. 


As to my own particular views, I am conscious of a slight 
change, or advance, of opinion on one important question, and it 
is a pleasure to acknowledge here a debt of gratitude to my 


PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION ΧΙ 


famous and inveterate foeman, Mr. Andrew Lang. I only wish 
the change were one which Mr. Lang were more likely to accept 
as typical of true repentance. 

I speak with diffidence on points of pure archaeology, but in 
his book on The World of Homer’ Mr. Lang seems to me to 
have shown that phase after phase of that world, where it is not 
Mycenaean, agrees with nothing that we know on solid earth 
before the sixth and fifth centuries. That is, the common opinion 
which places ‘ Homer’s world’ on solid earth in ‘ post-Mycenaean ’ 
times, from the tenth to the eighth century, is confronted with 
greater difficulties than ever. Our archaeological evidence is 
now fairly abundant, and no such world has been discovered. 
Of course there are old Mycenaean or ‘ Achaean’ elements. 
But, apart from these, Mr. Lang argues in detail that the men’s 
dress, the women’s dress, the corslets and armour, are markedly 
different from those of the earliest vases, and just like those of 
the sixth and fifth centuries. The dress is that worn by the 
‘older men of the wealthy classes’ a little before the time of 
Thucydides (Thuc. i. 6). The same is true, as I rejoice to find 
Mr. Lang saying, of the Homeric gods. They are, apart from 
traces of a wilder background, the gods of Pheidias. All our 
study of Greek religion has long been telling us so. The same, 
I would say, is true of the moral tone of Homer. Allowing for 
certain data in the saga, Homeric morals and ‘religion’ in the 
higher sense (see Mr. Lang’s excellent remarks on p. 120) are 
those of pre-sophistic Athens at her best. The expurgations of 
which I make so much use point on the whole in the same direc- 
tion. We have no reason to think that the cruelties and in- 
decencies which I believe to have been expurgated were specially 
objected to in the time, say, of the dipylon vases. The tone 
of Xenophanes, Thales, and Heraclitus is, I think, enough to 
show that they would pretty certainly be condemned in Ionia as 
soon as the great age of Ionia was well established. It is at any 
rate perfectly easy to show that they were all condemned in fifth- 
century Athens (see pp. 263 f.). 

Of course Mr. Lang and I interpret these facts differently. 
I take them as confirming the evidence for the Pisistratean recen - 
sion and the fluid condition of the poems in the fifth and fourth 


1 Chapters vill and ix. 


xii PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION 


centuries. All this is developed in my new chapter on the 
history of the text. Mr. Lang supposes that about the year 
1000 there was a pure ‘ Achaean’ age uncontaminated by Ionia, 
very brief and therefore unrecorded, very local and therefore 
undiscovered, which happened in all the above respects to be 
surprisingly like the age of Pisistratus, 450 years later, though 
different from all ages between. 

If the corslets are work of the sixth century or later, a much 
greater part of the elaboration of the /Zad than I formerly 
ventured to suggest must belong to the time of Pisistratus or even 
of Aeschylus. And I do not shrink from this conclusion. We 
know for certain of only one great creative age in Greek literature, 
that which extends, roughly speaking, from Aeschylus to Plato. 
But doubtless there lived strong men before Aeschylus; the 
beginning of the great age may confidently be extended to Solon 
or to Thales. All through this age we know that something 
called Homer was constantly recited: we have strong evidence 
to show that, even at the end of it, the text was still fluid and 
liable to be re-written. Of course we must not forget the old, 
the very old, substratum. But if we find upon that substratum 
work of a peculiar architectonic greatness, a peculiar humanity 
and eloquence and smoothness of diction, a peculiar dramatic 
form and tragic intensity, is it not reasonable to suppose that it 
acquired those qualities during the only age in which we know 
that Greece had them, or something like them, to give? 

Mycenae and Cnossus in their prime may conceivably have 
had such qualities. But the poems are not Mycenaean, much 
less Minoan. The great age of Greece certainly had them; 
and during the great age the poems were certainly still being 
recited and had not yet reached a final form. Between those two 
ages Greek civilization has little to show that rises above the 
level of respectable barbarism. One cannot indeed quite suppose 
that masses of old epic poetry lay completely dead and buried 
till some sixth-century Kynaethus dug them up. The epic con- 
vention is too fixed, the whole style is too intelligible, for that. 
And our miserable remains of the Rejected Epics illustrate sug- 
gestively what the substratum, or the sources, of the /Zad may 
have been like, before they were glorified. There is a separate 
inquiry there. But it looks as if we must face the probability 


PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION xiii 


that a far larger amount of real creative work than we ever 
suspected was done upon both //Zad and Odyssey by poets not 
far removed either in date or in spirit from Pindar and the great 
Athenians: that the history of Greek literature is after all a 
great and intelligible contzxuum, not one shining prehistoric 
island, then centuries of darkness, and then all the rest. 

There has been a great output of books on Homer in the last 
three years; I mention here only a few that may be useful to my 
readers.1 Dealing with the general question, we have to welcome 
a second edition of Paul Cauer’s lucid and fascinating Grund- 
Jragen der Homerkrittk (Leipzig, 1910), to which in my twenties 
I owed a large debt of gratitude, and an Italian translation of 
Drerup’s well-known and copiously illustrated Homer, enlarged 
and improved. A new book, Georg Finsler’s Homer (Berlin, 
1908), gives an extraordinarily comprehensive and compressed 
account of almost all sides of Homeric criticism; Professor 
Seymour's useful 7.275 zz the Homeric A ge (Macmillan, 1908) is 
full of minute and sober observation; the short Pvode eines 
wissenschaftlichen Kommentars zu Homer, by E. Hermann 
(Hansaschule-Festschrift, 1908), is particularly promising. I hope 
it will be carried further. 

Dealing with the actual analysis of the poems, Wilamowitz, in 
a paper on O (Sitzungsber. d.k. Preussischen Akademte, 1910, 
xxi), has argued very persuasively that most of that book was 
probably composed to make room in a connected Iliad for two 
existing but independent lays, I and K. Another excellent 
article is Hektor’s Abschied, by Erich Bethe (A bdhandlungen der 
k. Sachsischen Ges. α΄. Wissenschaften, xxvii, No. xii), arguing 
that in the main the author of Z was also the author of 2, 
and, though a late poet, perhaps deserves the name of Homer. 
There are certainly marked similarities between the two books. 
Dr. Κα. Rothe’s ας als Dichtung (Paderborn, 1910) is a very 
erudite and pleasing restatement of the conservative position. 
He considers that Homer (1) used old epic material freely, but 
turned it all to his own artistic ends; (2) that when he had finished 
the poem he sometimes turned back to it and added pieces; 
(3) that he lived in a charming court in Ionia, founded by the 


1 A very complete bibliography is in Rothe’s articles, first in Bursian’s 
Sahresbericht, and afterwards in Zeitschr. f. d. Gymnasialwesen. 


xiv PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION 


last king of Mycenae, who had fled thither from the Achaeans, 
and betrayed other personal weaknesses which are reflected in 
the figure of Agamemnon. This, of course, seems to me like 
a fairy-story, but much of Rothe’s criticism is good. Mr. T. W. 
Allen’s articles on the Homeridae, the Epic Cycle, and the 
Catalogue are also written from a severely unitarian standpoint 
(Classical Quarterly 1 (1907), I (two articles); 7. H. S. xxx. 
pp. 292-323). Mr. Andrew Lang’s World of Homer (Longmans, 
1910) restates his old views with some interesting modifications 
in the light of recent literature. Mr. Shewan’s Doloneta 
(Macmillan, 1911) is an industrious and gallant attack upon all 
critics who have either spoken disrespectfully of K or thought 
its style in any way peculiar. Van Gennep's little Question 
@ Homere has a useful bibliography by A. J. Reinach (Paris, 1910). 
Dr. Verrall’s volume of essays, The Bacchants of Euripides 
(Cambridge, 1910), contains two valuable papers on Homeric 
subjects: Zhe First Homer, showing that in the fifth century 
‘Homer’ meant much more than ‘The //ad and the Odyssey’ 
and suggesting that the first Epic Cycle dates from Pisistratus; and 
The Mutiny of Idomeneus, arguing a harmonization of sources 
in Jzad K-N. Among new attempts at analysis of the poems 
we have Fick’s Entstehung der Odyssee (Gottingen, 1910), terse 
and masterly, like all that Fick writes, though involved with 
improbable speculations; and Miss Stawell’s striking work, 
Homer and the Iliad, a book full of fine observation and poetical 
understanding. She attempts to reconstruct an ‘ original Iliad’ 
(omitting most of B, all H, 0, I, Καὶ N, 2, half O, and much of 
the later books, but keeping at all costs Z and 2), and fortifies 
her results by a further study of the language; this ‘original 
Iliad’, however, probably made free use of older poems. 

A somewhat new form of ‘unitarianism’ is put forth in 
Dr. Milder’s vigorous and valuable book, Dze Lhas und thre 
Quellen (Weidmann, 1910). ‘An abundance of unassimilated 
material in spite of a constant effort after uniformity ’ is his descrip- 
tion of the problem, and he finds its solution in the hypothesis 
of a single gifted and artificial poet who, by processes of daring 
fiction, wrought a new poem out of numbers of old ones—the old 
Thebais, a Meleager epic, a Heracleia, a Pylian epic, an Achilleis, 
and others. The //ad was thus produced in Ionia about the 


PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION EVA 


year 625, the Odyssey somewhat later at the Court of Pisistratus. 
His poet does much the same work as the ‘ Bearbeiter’ or 
‘Diaskeuast’ of earlier scholars, only more of it. 

The ‘ surface corruption ’, already ably treated of late years by 
such editors as Van Leeuwen and Professor Platt, is the subject 
of many clever and interesting conjectures in Mr. Agar’s 
Homerica. Perhaps I may be allowed to urge every student 
who wishes either to study the language or to enjoy the music 
of Homer to accustom himself to ‘ thinking away ’ this destructive 
and often unmetrical surface-corruption. For English readers 
the best method is a constant reference to such texts as I have 
mentioned above, together with an occasional reading of Fick. 
The outline of this problem, as of most others affecting Homer, 
will be found in Father Browne’s Homeric Study (Macmillan, 
1905). 

G. M. 


Curist CHURCH, OxForD, 
May rgtt. 


PRA ΣΟΙ 
ΤῸ THEVFIRS. EDIntON 


THESE lectures were written in response to an invitation from 
Harvard University to deliver the Gardiner Lane Course for 1907. 
Only some half of them were actually so delivered. The subject 
had been so long forming itself in my mind, and I was also so 
anxious not to allow any mere lack of pains to prove me un- 
worthy of the honour thus offered me, that I soon found my 
material completely outrunning the bounds of the proposed 
course. I print the whole book; but I must confess that those 
parts of it which were spoken at Harvard have, if it is not 
egotistical to say so, a special place in my affections, through 
their association with the constant and most considerate kindness 
of Mr. and Mrs. Lane and of many others who became in varying 
degrees my xezoz in America. 

The book touches on some subjects where, feeling more than 
usually conscious of the insecurity of my own knowledge, I have 
not scrupled to take advantage of the learning of my friends. 
On several points of archaeology and primitive history I have 
sought counsel from Professor J. L. Myres; on points of Old 
French from Miss Pope of Somerville College; on Semitic 
matters from my colleague Professor D. S. Margoliouth, whose 
vast stores have stood always most generously open to me. 
In a more general way I am conscious of help received from 
Mr. J. W. Mackail and Mr. T. C. Snow, and above all from 
Miss J. E. Harrison, who read the Lectures in MS. and called my 
attention to much recent foreign literature which I should other- 
wise have neglected. The debt which I owe to her Prolegomena, 
also, will be visible on many of the ensuing pages. 

In subjects such as these the conclusions reached by any writer 
can often be neither certain nor precise. Yet they may none the 
less be interesting and even valuable. If our evidence is incom- 
plete, that is no reason for not using it as far as it goes. I have 


| 


PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION XVii 


tried throughout the book never to think about making a debating 
case, or taking up the positions most easy to defend; but always 
to set out honestly and with much reflection what really seems to 
me to be most like the truth. I feel, indeed, that 1 ought perhaps 
to have stated my evidence much more fully and systematically. 
My excuse is that the lectures were originally written almost 
without books of reference, and that when I went over them to 
verify my statements and cite my authorities I hesitated to load 
the book with references which might be unnecessary, and which 
in any case were rather in the nature of afterthoughts. 

As regards the Homeric Question, which forms in one way or 
another an important element in my subject, I have long felt that 
the recent reaction against advanced views has been largely due, 
not indeed to lack of knowledge, but to inadequate understanding 
of what the ‘advanced’ critics really mean. A good part of my 
present work has therefore lain in thinking out with rather more 
imaginative effort many of the common phrases and hypotheses 
of Homeric criticism. My own views are not, of course, identical 
with those of any other writer. Among English scholars I agree 
most closely with Dr. Leaf, and may almost say that I accept his 
work as a basis. For the rest, I follow generally in the main 
tradition of Wolf, Lachmann, Kirchhoff, Wilamowitz. But 
the more I read, the more conscious I am of good work being 
done on all sides in the investigation of Greek religion and early 
history, and of the astonishing advance which those subjects have 
made within my own memory. The advance still continues. 
Archaeologists are throwing shafts of light even across that Dark 
Age of which I speak so much in Lectures II and HI. My own 
little book, heaven knows! indulges in no dream of making 
a final statement of the truth on any part of its field. It is only 
an attempt to puzzle out a little more of the meaning of a certain 
remote age of the world, whose beauty and whose power of 
inspiration seem to shine the more wonderful the more resolutely 
we set ourselves to understand it. 

GILBERT MURRAY. 


NEw COLLEGE, OXFORD, 
Sept. 1907. ἔ 


2760 b 


ΠΥ ΑΙ TABLE OF ‘CONTENTS 


INTRODUCTION 


GREECE AND THE PROGRESS OF MAN 


1. Greek Poetry and Thought conceived as forces in the service 
of man . . . 
Other modern views of the eres: 
a. The Greek as ‘ Classic’ ; true, if rightly understood 
ὁ. The Greek as ‘Pagan’; directly false . 
Hellenism always in an uphill war against epaeahiaine ; 
e.g. in the questions of : 
. Human sacrifice . 
Zs eal : 
3. The subjection τ Women ; 
4. Impurity and Cruelty 
c. The Greek as Levantine é : : : 
2. Poetry and Progress. Can Poetry advance ? Can interest in the 
bettering of life be a poetical emotion? 
3. The Puritan and the Artist. The bettering of life implies her 
union, and this is found in Hellenism 


Sophrosyné 


A. THE PEOPLE 


I. THE MIGRATIONS: THE POLIS 


1. The prehistoric cities followed by a Dark Age 
The stones 
The traditions . 
2. A commercial civilization, not Greek but pre- “Cree (ae in- 
stanced by Mycenae, Troy, &c.). 
3. Ruined by invasions of peoples from the North 
The earliest mixture 
Aegean peoples, Pelasgi, Hittites i 
Northerners, Achaeans, ἅς. ; A Lael of races 
4. Processes of invasion : 
Condition about the thirteenth ἐλ B.C. 
Last stages; by land and by sea; seizing an island . 


24-25 
26 


27-39 
27-29 
29-34 


34-39 
39-57 
39-41 
41-45 
45-46 
47-57 
47-50 
51-55 


ΧΧ ANALYTICAL TABLE OF CONTENTS 


This picture confirmed by the foundation-legends of the 


Ionian cities 
5. The Dark Age; the Walled ei, 
Religion of the Polis 


PAGES 


55-57 
57-58 
58-60 


II. THE CHAOS OF THE MIGRATIONS AND THE 


ELEMENT OF REGENERATION 


A. The wreck of institutions : 

1. Agricultural sanctions; the ox . 

2. Tribal gods: the breaking up of tribes 

3. Heroes, oracles, the dead . : 

4. The local Koraz; the Kouroz 

5. The family, patriarchal and pre- paerareual 

Hesiod’s Fifth age and the survival of Azdés and Nemesis 

B. Aidés and Nemesis 

The meaning of the words : 3 ᾿ : ᾿ 

Hesiod’s five deadly sins; the sanctity of the helpless . 


Small importance of Aidés in later Greek ee 


Reasons 
Effect of this early Anse on Greck eileen asa atiole 


B. THE. LITERATURE 
I. AN ANCIENT TRADITIONAL BOOK 


1, Nature of a book in early times 
‘ Logot’ and ‘ Logiot Andres’ ᾿ 
The Muses. The ‘Grammata’ : : : - 
Long life and growth of a book . 
2. Examples : 
(The Pilot series, Flames, eae Rickard. Wl, Hee: : neue 
Pseudo-Callisthenes, 105-106; The ne Roland, a7 
3. Especially the Hebrew scriptures. 
Deuteronomy . ἰ - 
J, E, and P; their sources a poate : : . 
τς πὸ in the history told by the Pentateuch 
a. Unconscious: myth, tribal spirit, inadequate language. 
ὦ. Conscious: archaism and expurgation . 


1. THE ILIAD AS A TRADITIONAL BOOK 


A. EXPURGATIONS: THE HOMERIC SPIRIT 


Ὲ The Poems represent an Idealized Past 
Expurgation in the Alexandrian Critics 
Traces of earlier expurgations . 


93-99 
93-96 
96-99 
99-100 
100-107 


. 107-119 
. 107-108 
. 108-113 
. 114-110 
. II4-115 
. II5-119 


. 120-122 
. 122-124 
. 125-140 


ANALYTICAL TABLE OF CONTENTS xxi 
PAGES 
a. Impurity ΤΣ : eu 825-126 
6, Cruel and barbarous ἜΣ (ue ΤΡ ἘΠῚ the dead, 
decapitation, poisoned arrows, &c.) . 126-130 
c. Human Sacrifice : : é : ὃ : . 130-140 
I. Sacrifice of Virgins. The Taboo of the War Path . 131-135 
2. Sacrifice of Divine Kings. Division between Man and 
God, ~. Ε - : : : : ° . 135-140 
Expurgation baffled : 
Hector; cf. Uriah ; how Homer rises to the occasion . 140-143 
The //éad in Education ; the Homeric Spirit . 143-145 
B, EVIDENCES 
aia changes of Custom . 146-168 
. Armour and tactics; the Myconaeine ana ha’ ‘ Fiche Men’ 147=159 
(General armour, 147-149; tactics, 150-154; the ‘¢horéx, 
154-157; superpositions, unrealized epithets, 157-160.) 
2. Bronze and iron : : : . 160-161 
3. Burial and burning . 161-162 
4. Altars and Temples . . 162-164 
5. Hfedna and dowries . . 164-165 
6. Houses; J/egaron and Palace, &e. . 165-168 
Ο. PECULIARITIES 
I, Tradition and Artistic Fiction; the latter prominent in Greek 
Epos . . 169-170 
Contrast with the Book of yee ἐὸν the paren of ie 
might appear in a Greek epic : 170-172 
— Tradition and Fiction: the basis of the //zad is Tradition 5 . 173-174 
The /dad using older sources; Searels and Lycurgus 
from the Corinthiaca . : ὃ : . 174-177 
Explanation : Reciprocal quotation in eraitional books . . 177-178 
Some sources of the /Zad: the Catalogue ; Miilder . 178-182 
2. What is the /Zzaz? Nota Chronicle poem. . 183-184 
Not exactly a Lay : . 184-185 
— But a Lay incrusted with additions and nia del to δι ον all 
natural limits . 186-187 
(Fictional use of the Wrath- Ractive: 186.) 

— 3. For what purpose can such a poem have been destined ? . 187-194 
The Panathenaea-tradition and its meaning . 188-100 
Before the Panathenaea? - I9QI-193 
Epideixis 194 


XXii ANALYTICAL TABLE OF CONTENTS 


D. HISTORICAL CONTENT OF THE ILIAD 


PAGES 
Is Homer more historic than the non-Homeric Tradition? . . 195-198 
Theory of ‘historical nucleus’. .. - ‘ - : 2 . 199-201 
History in Fiction . δ : . : : : : ; . 201-202 
The Catalogue . ; : ὃ ὃ : : A : A . 202-204 
Fiction and Myth . : : = x : 5 : ὃ . 204-205 
Helen : - 5 ὁ : : - : : 5 : . 205-206 
Achilles. : : : : : ‘ ‘ ; : ς . 206-208 
Agamemnon . ; A : 5 : : , . 208-210 
Odysseus and the Calendar : : : ¢ : : : . 210-212 
Thersites . : : 0 : : ; : ὶ ; ‘ » 212-215 
Aias, Diomedes : : ; : : : : : . 215-217 

E. HISTORICAL CONTENT OF THE ILIAD, continued 
The historical fact always transmuted : : 5 : 218 
Echoes of pre-Homeric warfare : 5 : ; : : . 219-226 
Sarpedon and Tlepolemus ‘ ὃ : : : : . 219-220 
The Androktasiaz: Phaestus, Adinstas ἃ : 3 . 221-223 
Original geography : Homes of Andromache, Hea Hele : . 224-227 
Greek and Northern epics - ὃ : 5 : . 227-230 
Conjectural results . . - : : Ξ : . . 230-232 
The successive ‘ Births’ of ἘΠῊΝ : : : ; : : . 232-237 

III. THE ILIAD AS A GREAT POEM 

How scientific analysis affects our appreciation of the //zad, and 
where its greatness lies - : : . 238-260 
We must consider the real aes not the hypothetical Poet . 239-242 
Difficulties . 5 : ‘ ‘ Z . 242-249 

A. Apparent vices of the Πές asa eae 

1. Subject second-rate 5 : : 242 
2. Lack of finish in hidden fas 5 conte dictions ἃς, : . 242-243 
3. Loose use of linguistic forms . é : ἐ 3 A . 244-245 
4. ‘Ready-made’ descriptions and similes . ; : : . 245-249 


(Examples from M: the baffled lion, 245-247; the two 
oaks, 247-249.) 
These seem to show a lack of originality or even of sincerity. 

B. Answer. The nature and the standards of a Traditional Book . 249-260 
‘ Originality’ and intensity of imagination . 5 . 249-251 
Intensity of imagination in the //ad and the Old Tecemene 

(Helen and Jehu.) : : : : : : : . 252-255 


The data and the problem . 


ANALYTICAL TABLE OF CONTENTS = xxiii 
PAGES 

This intensity not connected with self-assertion, but with self- 
devotion . 5 : . 255-256 
Position of a late ‘ Son of Hower! - . 257-258 
Hence comes the peculiar appeal of most Dradiiowal Boake . 258-260 

IV. IONIA AND ATTICA 

. Homer is never born in Miletus or Ephesus: why? 261 
Spirit of Ionia in its bloom; Thales, ἄς... : . 262-263 

The ultimate failure of senesced to meet the demande ἢ this 
newage . : A : . 263-264 

Homeric theology ΠΕ ΠΝ local capersucen nor 
advanced thought : : : . 265-267 
. The Milesian Spirit and its treatment of fue Homeric one 268 

Examples : 

Titanomachia in Hesiod and Theomachia in Homer . 269-271 
Hieros Gamos and Dios Apaté . . . 271-273 

. The Epos dies in Ionia; but the Heroic Saga ands a new ἜΤ 

in Attic Tragedy, which goes back to a severer and more 
antique spirit ‘ 2 : : ᾿ : . 273-275 

Examples: 
Io in Aeschylus: the Sufpliant Women, the Prometheus . 276-279 
Conclusion : : é : . 279-281 
V. FROM KNOWN TO UNKNOWN 

. The verbal text becomes uncertain when traced back beyond 
150 B.C. . 282-295 
The Alexandrian critics . 283-284 
What were the ‘ pre- ἘΠῚ Σ τ ΕΠ evs? . 285-295 
Evidence of Papyri . 286-289 
Evidence of quotations . 289-294 
Conclusion: special case of Plato 295 

. The incidents of the story become uncertain wher feed heyond 

about 400 B.C. (The Wall, the Catalogue, the Doloneia, 
the end of the Odyssey) . 295-297 

. The meaning of ‘ Homer’ becomes uneereaia een caved beyond 
about 450 Βα. ΄- : . . 298-299 

. The Panathenaic Recitation ieluded only the Πρ ἀπά the 
Odyssey. : : : . 299-301 

. The traditional text comes fora Athens: no can Ate text seems 
to have survived . . : . 301-302 
What text was used at the Panathensea i . 302-304 
Pisistratus: the last glimpse of land . . 304-306 


. 307-316 


A 


xxiv ANALYTICAL TABLE OF CONTENTS 


SS rant vawp 


APPENDICES 


. The Pharmakoi and Human Sacrifice 
. Torture of Slave Witnesses . 


The Thalassocrats 


. Hubris, Diké, Horkos . 


The Pseudo-Callisthenes 


. Stages of Old French Poems: Raton! and St. Ales 
. Expurgation in the Hymn to Demeter 
. The Epic Cycle . : Ξ 


Transliteration from the ‘ Old ASphabet : 
The Catalogue as a ‘ Legal Document’ 


INDEX 


PAGES 


. 317-321 
- 321-322 
. 322-326 
. 326-329 
. 329-331 
. 331-337 
. 337-339 
. 339-345 
. 346-347 
. 348-349 


351-356 


GREECE AND THE PROGRESS OF MAN 


THESE lectures form the first part of an attempt to study the 
growth of Greek poetry from a particular point of view, namely, 
as the embodiment of a force making for the progress of the 
human race, By progress I understand some gradual ennobling 
and enriching of the content of life; or, to adopt the magnificent 
language of the document known in Scotland as ‘the Shorter 
Catechism ’, some movement towards the attainment of that ‘ chief 
end of man ’, which is ‘to glorify God and enjoy him for ever’, 

This conception of all the arts, even poetry, as being so many 
forms or parts of the service of man, may strike a hearer at first 
as somewhat modern and removed from ancient habits of thought. 
But I think the truth is just the opposite. The idea of service to 
the community was more deeply rooted in the Greeks than in us. 
And as soon as they began to reflect about literature at all—which 
they did very early—the main question they asked about each 
writer was almost always upon these lines: ‘Does he help to 
make better men?’ ‘Does he make life a better thing?’ We all 
know with what rigid and passionate Puritanism this view is 
asserted by Plato. But Plato can never be taken as representing 
the average man. There is better evidence of ordinary feeling 
in the /rogs of Aristophanes.' ‘On what grounds should a poet 
be admired ?’ says Aeschylus, and Euripides answers—‘ For his 
skill, his good counsel, and because we make men better in their 
cities’, Amid all the many cross-currents of criticism illustrated 
in the /rogs, there is no protest against this judging of poetry 
by its fruits. The principle is accepted by all parties. 

Among later writers the idea of the service of man, or the 
bettering of human life, has become habitual and familiar. 
Diodorus begins his history by a reference to the long chain of 


* v. 1008, 1035, and the whole scene : cf. also Isocr. iy. ὃ 159, and elsewhere, 
2760 B 


2 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC I 


historians who ‘have aspired by their own labours to benefit our 
common life’! Polybius speaks of history as the most obvious 
help towards ‘ the correcting of life’. 

Thucydides, as we all remember, will be content if his work, 
whether interesting or uninteresting to an audience, is judged to 
be useful. Denys of Halicarnassus sums up the praises of the 
Athenians by saying, in the very language of an old Delphian 
decree, that they ‘made gentle the life of the world’. 

Theologians and philosophers, especially those of the more 
rationalist schools, carry the conception further. The traditional 
Gods are explained as being so many great men of past ages 
who have in their various ways served humanity. ‘That which 
benefits human life is God,’ said Prodicus in the fifth century B.C. 
‘Deus est mortali iuvare mortalem,’ says Pliny from a Stoic source 
in the first A.D. And in later times the view is always widely 
current, a common meeting ground for Euhemerist, Stoic, and 
Epicurean. The history taught in schools largely consisted, if 
we may generalize from our extant Scholiasts, in lists of these 
benefactors of mankind : 


Inventas aut qui vitam excoluere per artis, 
Quique sui memores alios fecere merendo.’ 


1 Diod. i. 1 τοῖς ἰδίοις πόνοις ὠφελῆσαι τὸν κοινὸν βίον ἐφιλοτιμήθησαν. Cf. 
Polyb. i. 1 (μηδεμίαν... ἑτοιμοτέραν τοῖς ἀνθρώποις διόρθωσιν) ; Thuc. i. 22 ; Dion. 
Hal. de Thucyd. p. 919 ᾿Αθηναῖοι... οἱ τὸν κοινὸν βίον ἐξημερώσαντες ; idem, 
iv. 25 (p. 7ζοι R) on Servius Tullius. Herodotus, as one might expect, has 
more of the mere artist about him: he writes, ὡς μήτε τὰ γενόμενα ἐξ ἀνθρώπων 
τῷ χρόνῳ ἐξίτηλα γένηται, μήτε ἔργα μεγάλα τε καὶ θωμαστά, τὰ μὲν Ἕλλησι, τὰ δὲ 
βαρβάροισι ἀποδεχθέντα, ἀκλεᾶ γένηται (i. 1). Compare also the remarkable 
language of a Delphic Inscription of the second century B.C., in Bu/letin de 
Corr. Hellénigue, 1900, p. 96, conferring honours on certain Athenians: 
"Edoke τοῖς ᾿Αμφικτύοσιν * ἐπειδὴ γεγονέναι καὶ συνειλέχθαι τεχνιτῶν σύνοδον παρ᾽ 
᾿Αθηναίοις συμβέβηκε πρῶτον, ὧν ὁ δῆμος ἁπάντων τῶν ἐν ἀνθρώποις ἀγαθῶν ἀρχηγὸς 
κατασταθείς, ἐγ μὲν τοῦ θηριώδους βίου μετήγαγεν τοὺς ἀνθρώπους εἰς ἡμερότητα, 
παραίτιος δ᾽ ἐγενήθη τῆς πρὸς ἀλλήλους κοινωνίας, εἰσαγαγὼν τὴν τῶν μυστηρίων 
παράδοσιν καὶ διὰ τούτων παραγγείλας τοῖς ἅπασιν ὅτι μέγιστον ἀγαθόν ἐστιν ἐν 
ἀνθρώποις ἡ πρὸς ἑαυτοὺς χρῆσίς τε καὶ πίστις, ἔτι δὲ τῶν δοθέντων ὑπὸ τῶν θεῶν 
περὶ τῶν ἀνθρώπων νόμων καὶ τῆς παιδείας... Decreed by the Amphictyons 
of Delphi: Whereas it was in Athens that a union of the craftsmen of 
Dionysus (i.e. tragic actors and poets) first arose and was gathered together ; 
and whereas the People of Athens, the established leader in all human 
advance, first won mankind from the life of wild beasts to gentleness ; and, by 
introducing the Mysteries and thereby proclaiming to the world that the 
greatest good for mankind is a spirit of help and trust toward one another, 
hath been part maker of the co-operation of men with men, and of the laws 
given by the gods for the treatment of men and of education...’ 

2 Plin. Ast. Nat. ii. 7. 18. Vergil, Aez. vi. 663. Cf. Lucr. v, latter part. I 


I THE SERVICE OF MAN 3 


It is the very language and spirit of that service of humanity 
which lies at the heart of the practical religion of the present 
day. The modern artist or admirer of art is apt to be offended 
by it. Not, I think, justly. In a Greek society the artist was 
treated frankly as a friend and fellow worker. He helped to 
make life beautiful, which is at least one large and obvious way 
of making it good. In a modern society he is a distinguished 
alien, approached with a mixture of adulation and mistrust. We 
suspect that what he calls beautiful may be really wicked. 

I must take for granted many fundamental theses. That man 
has progressed, for one thing, and that the direction in which 
Western civilization has moved is on the whole a good one. I 
think that few of us seriously deny these propositions ; and those 
who do would not be moved by my arguments. 

Now we find it generally admitted that the seeds of Western 
civilization are mostly to be found in Greece and not elsewhere. 
Yet it is curious how seldom Greek Literature is. regarded from 
this point of view, as an embodiment of the progressive spirit, an 
expression of the struggle of the human soul towards freedom 
and ennoblement. 


We have had in abundance the classical point of view. The 
Greeks have been the Classics, the masters in art and letters, 
models of a finished and more or less unapproachable perfection 
in form. Or rather, to put it more accurately, the Greeks round 
about the fifth century B.C., and the Romans of the centuries just 
before and after the Christian era, have been peculiarly the 
Classics, and other writers have been admitted to various degrees 
of classic dignity in proportion as they approached to the two 
great periods. 

Now I should like, if time permitted, to trace this conception 
to its origin. Unreal as it sometimes sounds, it has its base in 
mere fact. The Greeks and Romans of those two periods did, 
for some reason or other, produce in most departments of thought 
better work than any of the generations that succeeded them for 
some thousand years or so; and what 15 more, the generations of 


suspect that this view of human history was largely inspired by the great work 
of Dicaearchus, Bios Ἑλλάδος, He was an immediate disciple of Aristotle ; the 
Life of Hellas was a history of Greek civilization. Fragments in /. H. G. ii. 


B 2 


4 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC I 


the decadence had the extreme good sense to see it. As regards 
literature, the point is too obvious to need illustration. Let us 
take a quite different field, the science of medicine. If a man 
wished to learn medicine in the later ages of the Roman or 
Byzantine empires, and right on to the Renaissance, to whom did 
he go for his knowledge? He went, as far as I can make out, to 
various handbooks and epitomes of the works of two ancient 
doctors ; of Galen, a Greek who practised in Rome in the year 
160 A.D., and of Hippocrates, a Greek who practised in Cos and 
Athens in the fifth century B.c. And Galen’s own work largely 
takes the form of a commentary on Hippocrates. 

There is an interesting MS. extant of a treatise on Dislocations 
by one Apollonius of Citium in Cyprus. The MS. was written in 
Constantinople about the year 950 A. D., and it begins with a paean 
of joy over the discovery of the works of this ancient surgeon, 
with his accurate drawings to show how the various dislocations 
should be set. The text was written out. The illustrations 
were carefully copied. Where the old drawings were blurred or 
damaged the copies were left incomplete, lest some mistake 
should be made." Why? Because this ancient surgeon, living 
about 150 B.C., knew how to set dislocated limbs a great deal 
better than people who lived a thousand years after him. It was 
a piece of good fortune to them to rediscover his work. And 
his writing, again, takes the form of a commentary on the fifth- 
century Hippocrates. Hippocrates’ own writing does not look 
back. It is consciously progressive and original. 

That is what the Classics once were. I will not attempt to 
trace the stages through which their empire has waned and their 
power to help us dwindled away. What they now possess is a 
limited but a most interesting domain. I will express it in this 
way. There seems to be in human effort a part that is progressive 
and transient, and another which is stationary or eternal. In some 
things we find that a very third-rate person who happens to have 
been born in 1860 can teach us far more than a great genius or 
a great reformer who was born in 1760. About electricity, for 
instance, or steamships. In the other sphere it is the quality of 


* See Schéne’s introduction to his large edition (Teubner, 1896), where 
this point is proved. See also Greek Medicine in Rome, by Sir Clifford 
Allbutt. 1921. 


I THE CLASSICS 5 


the man or his work which tells. And it tells almost unaffected 
by distance : what was once beautiful is still beautiful; what was 
once great of soul is still great. And if Shakespeare was born 
nearly 400 years ago, and St. Paul rg00 and Aeschylus over 2000, 
those facts do not seem to make any noteworthy difference in the 
value of their work. This distinction is, I think, implied in the 
current phrase which says that the ancient Greeks are still classics 
in point of style. ~ 

Now, in the narrow sense of style, any such view as this would 
be almost grotesque. No modern historian could possibly model 
his stylé"0m-the strange contorted language of Thucydides; no 
playwright cotild copy Aeschylus. Aeschylus and Thucydides 

‘were men of extraordinary genius who irresistibly bent the Greek 
p) language to their will. They are not, in any literal sense, models 
~*of normal style. If, however, we understand ‘style’ broadly 
enough, so that style means the same as ‘form’, and ‘ form’ in- 
cludes ‘ spirit’, then, I think, the principle is true. The classical 
books are in general the books which have possessed for mankind 
such vitality of interest that they are still read and enjoyed at a 
time when all the other books written within ten centuries of 
them have long since been dead. There must be something 
peculiar about a book of which the world feels after two thousand 
years that it has not yet had enough. One would like to know 
what it is that produces this permanent and not transient quality 
of interest. And it is partly for this purpose that we study the 
Classics. In some few ways one can know. Form or spirit in 
some sense lives longer than matter; austerity perhaps lives 
longer than sweetness; what is simple and serious lives longer 
than what is merely clever. Much more remains unanalysable, 
or can only be found by study of the books themselves. But 
there are qualities that make things live; and that which lives 
becomes classical. 

Yet I think that this kernel of truth is involved in much error. 
It is probable that these models of style, as they were read both 
in the Middle Ages and the Renaissance, were often bad models 
rather than good. The accident was imitated, not the essence. 
And the influence of the most living and original of all literatures 
produced the corruptness of Classicism, a style almost certainly 
very vicious, and that fortworeasons. First, because it attempted 


6 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC I 


to reproduce in an uninflected language all kinds of exquisite 
effects, largely connected with the order of words and the building 
of periods, which are only possible and natural ina highly inflected 
language. Secondly, because, in its appreciation of the immense 
imaginative value of tradition and allusion, it groped round for 
a tradition and found only one that was foreign and exotic and 
therefore could not truly serve its purpose. There is a great 
grandeur in the prose of Milton and Hooker; there is at least 
quaintness in the poetical style, largely inspired by Ovid, which 
ran riot during the Renaissance, a style in which people called the 
sun ‘Phoebus’ or the moon ‘chaste Dian’, and were proud of 
knowing stories of a complicated mythology which was not 
accessible to ‘the vulgar’. There are traces of something like 
classicism in Greek poetry, I admit. They are the first signs of 
its decay. The classicist spirit is just so far related to the living 
spirit of Greek poetry, that it is a ranker form of the same poison 
by which Greek poetry died. 

That sort of eighteenth-century or Renaissance classicism is 
perhaps dead, or no longer an active danger to the understanding 
of Greek. But there are other classicisms which threaten us still. 
Scholars in talking of the classics have allowed the object of their 
study to become confused with the medium through which they 
approach it. It is as though a man could not think of the stars 
except in terms of telescopes, or of mountains and sea except in 
terms of railway journeys and hotels. Nearly all of us approach 
the classics through an atmosphere of education, with its con- 
comitants of dictionary and grammar, its unnatural calm, its 
extreme emphasis upon dutifulness and industry, and the subtle 
degradation of spirit produced by its system of examinations. 

Some indeed take another path. From Winckelmann onwards 
there have been many critics who felt, for obvious reasons, that 
they could understand a Greek statue more easily than a Greek 
poem. Hence comes another sort of classicism, a tendency to 
explain the poems by the statues. A false road; partly because 
the immense majority of extant statues are not Classical Greek, 
but Graeco-Roman, and marked with the taint of the decadence: 
but far more because, in the essence of things, poems are made of 
quick words, and statues of stone, things that are not alike and 
never have been. 


I DIFFICULTIES OF UNDERSTANDING 7 


The fact seems to be that the understanding of Greek poetry 
needs first a good deal of hard linguistic study, and then, since 
every one who likes poetry must have in himself some germs of 
a poet, a poet’s readiness of imaginative sympathy. As things 
are, the poetical minds are often repelled by the grammatical 
drudgery: and the grammarians at the end of their labours are 
apt to find that their little spring of poetry has dried up. 


The wise want love, and those who love want wisdom: 
And all best things are thus confused to ill. 


As to all these dogmas about what is Classical, I think we 

‘should be on our guard. Classical and modern; classical and 
romantic; classical and Christian; there are no doubt some real 
differences corresponding to these phrases, but I would urge 
respectfully upon any student who loves poetry, that he should 
approach his ancient poets quite simply and take what they have 
to give him, not start off by expecting them to be ‘classical’ or 
‘statuesque’ or ‘ pre-Christian’ or anything else. The more you 
understand them, the less of these differences you will feel. And 
for a simple reason : that the differences lie largely in the accident 
of our own remoteness. We stand very far off, and have to 
strain our eyes. For us the comparison of ancient and modern 
is largely a comparison of something half-seen at a distance with 
something which we know intimately. We are apt to see only 
the bold outlines; we are apt to miss the little lights and shades, 
the quick vibrations of emotion that existed to a Greek in some 
particular word or phrase, and therefore we think they are not 
there. We mentally translate the words into a sort of dictionary 
language, never very apt indeed, but, we hope, at least dignified ; 
removed alike from subtlety and from littleness because it is 
emptied of most of its meaning ; serene and unemotional because 
we have not the knowledge or the sympathy to catch, across this 
gulf of years, the peculiar thrill of what was once a ‘wingéd 
word’ flying from soul to soul. It is perhaps in this department 
that the most pressing work of pure scholarship remains to 
be done. 


That conception of the Greeks as Classic, then, has a basis of 
truth. It is only apt to be misstated, and so to darken counsel. 


8 THE RISE OF THE ‘GREEK ‘EPIC I 


There is, however, a peculiar modification of it—which is almost 
the direct opposite of the truth ; a conception of Hellenism as 
representing some easy-going half-animal form of life, untroubled 
by conscience or ideals or duties, and the Greeks as a gay uncon- 
scious hedonistic race, possessing the somewhat superficial merits 
of extreme good looks and a mythically fine climate. There is 
no reason to suppose the ancient Greeks miraculously handsome, 
any more than to suppose that there is no dirty weather in the 
Aegean. This view has so little of the semblance of truth about 
it, that one wonders how it can have arisen. There are of 
course the causes mentioned above, the presence of the Graeco- 
Roman statues and the special difficulties of understanding the 
finer sides of the Greek language. But this particular conception 
of the Greeks as ‘ Pagans’ comes, I think, largely from the mere 
need of an antithesis to Christianity on its ascetic side. Christian 
apologists, anxious to associate all the highest things in the world 
with their own religion, have proceeded to make the Greek a 
sort of type of what the natural man would be without Christia- 
nity. And they have been met half-way by the rebels of their 
own flock, intellectual people of an artistic, a revolutionary, or 
a pleasure-loving temperament, who have turned against the 
narrowness or conventionality of their Christian surroundings, 
and then accepted, as a rough embodiment of their own rebellious 
ideals, some imaginary Pagan Greek. 

That would explain why this odd ideal of the Pagan Man 
should be abroad at all. But why should the Greeks be chosen 
as representing him? Partly for their mere eminence. They 
are the chief representatives of high civilization outside modern 
Christendom. Partly, I think, from a disproportionate attention 
sometimes bestowed on particular parts of Greek literature. But 
largely for a reason peculiar to their own case, which I believe 
to be very influential. We shall meet with it often during these 
lectures. It is that we, living in an age when certain great strides 
in human progress seem to be securely made and to need no 
more thinking about, look back upon these early pioneers of 
progress with some lack of historical sympathy, and attribute to 
the Greek spirit itself a number of primitive habits which it was 
not quite strong enough to conquer or else had not the leisure to 
grapple with. 


I THE PAGAN MAN 9 


Anthropologists have shown us what this Pagan Man really is. 
From the West Coast of Africa to the Pacific Isles in many vary- 
ing shapes he meets us, still with the old gaiety, the old crowns 
of flowers, the night-long dances, the phallus-bearing processions, 
the untroubled vices. We feel, no doubt, a charm in his simple 
and instinctive life, in the quick laughter and equally quick tears, 
the directness of action, the unhesitating response of sympathy. 
We must all of us have wished from time to time that our friends 
were more like Polynesians; especially those of us who live in 
University towns. And I think, in a certain limited sense, the 
Greeks probably were so. But in the main, as all classical 
literature shows, the Greek and the Pagan are direct opposites. 
That instinctive Pagan has a strangely weak hold on life. He is 
all beset with terror and blind cruelty and helplessness. The 
Pagan Man is really the unregenerate human animal, and 
Hellenism is a collective name for the very forces which, at the 
time under discussion, strove for his regeneration. Yet, histori- 
cally, one of the most characteristic things about Hellenism is 
that, though itself the opposite of savagery, it had savagery 
always near it. The peculiar and essential value of Greek civili- 
zation lies not so much in the great height which it ultimately 
attained, as in the wonderful spiritual effort by which it reached 
and sustained that height. The pre-Hellenic civilization of the 
Aegean area was in some ways very high. Minoan Crete, for 
example, produced larger buildings, better drainage, and in some 
respects a livelier art than classical Athens: it certainly con- 
trolled greater masses of concentrated capital. It does not how- 
ever seem to have possessed much of the special Hellenic inspira- 
tion. And the village communities of the mainland, whether of 
Northern or Southern origin, cannot have been much above the 
level of savagery. But the rise of Greece began from something 
a little worse than the average level of barbaric Aegean societies. 
It began, as I hope to show in the second of these lectures, in the 
dark age which resulted when even these societies, such as they 
were, fell into chaos. 

Allowing for indefinite differences of detail, there seems to be 
a certain primitive effortless level of human life, much the same 
all the world over, below which society would cease to be; a 
kind of world-wide swamp above which a few nations have built 


10 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC I 


what seem like permanent and well-weathered dwellings. Others 
make transient refuges which sink back into the slough. La 
nostaleve de la boue— home-sickness for the mud’—is a strong 
emotion in the human race. One sees it often in individual life, 
One can think of many instances in history: Hellenic king- 
doms like that of the Seleucidae in Syria; many provinces in the 
decline of the Roman Empire ; the west of Asia under the rule 
of the Turks; the rush of reaction in ancient Egypt after the 
religious reform of Amen-Hotep; or, again, the many efforts 
after higher religion in India, and the regular falling back of 
each reformation into the same primitive slough. 

Now, as Greek civilization rose from the swampy level of the 
neighbouring peoples, especially the various pre-Semitic races 
just behind the Aegean coasts, it could not shake itself clean all 
at once. Remnants of savagery lingered on in obscure parts of 
life, expurgated as a rule and made comparatively innocent, but 
still bearing the mark of their origin. Such remnants, as a 
matter of fact, tend to receive undue attention. The Greeks 
themselves are puzzled at a strange practice. Herodotus says 
that the explanation of it is sacred, and better not mentioned. 
Pausanias describes it with an antiquarian’s zest. Plutarch has a 
comforting theory of its real allegorical meaning. Our own 
friends the anthropologists, to whom all true Hellenists owe so 
much, naturally revel in such things. They search antiquity 
eagerly for traces of primitive man, for totems, cannibalism, 
human sacrifice, and the like. The traces which they discover 
are of the greatest value. But I think they have often mistaken 
the reverberation of an extinct barbarity for the actual barbarity 
itself. 

What strikes one most in Greek society is not so much any 
bad things that were actually done. Of course there were bad 
things, and always have been in all societies. It is rather the 
frightful proximity of worse things still. Practices that to us 
seem like the scarce credible stories of a remote past were to 
the fifth-century Athenian possibilities and even dangers. The 
jungle grew thick and close all around them, and the barrier 
between seemed very weak, very impalpable. 

You will notice in the ordinary language of ancient writers a 
characteristic which throws light on this aspect of Greek life. 


I HELLENISM AGAINST PAGANISM 11 


Non-Hellenic nations are nearly always spoken of by their tribes 
or races—‘ Ethné ’—Pelasgians, Macedonians, Phoenicians; the 
Greeks are spoken of by their cities, or, what comes to the 
same thing, by their islands—Milesians, Phocaeans, Eretrians, 
Athenians. On the mainland it is the Polis or circuit wall that 
forms the essential boundary of the nation; in the case of the 
islands, Samos, Naxos, Aegina, it is the equivalent wall of sea. 
Every Greek community is like a garrison of civilization amid 
wide hordes of barbarians ; a picked body of men, of whom each 
individual has in some sense to live up to a higher standard than 
can be expected of the common human animal. As the shield 
is the typical weapon of the Greek warrior, so the wall is the 
typical mark of Greek civilization. It is one of the facts that 
most need remembering in order to understand the greatnesses 
and the flaws of Hellenism, that it was represented everywhere 
by a handful of men holding an outpost, men who wrought their 
wonderful day’s work in political and moral wisdom, in specula- 
tion, in beauty of outward form and inward imagining, with an 
ear ever open to the sternest of life’s calls, and the hated spear 
and shield never far out of reach. No wonder that the task was 
too hard for them! Asa matter of fact, Greek civilization itself 
was never for a long enough time well policed and organized, 
its remoter villages were never thoroughly enough educated, to 
make it secure, even in its central places, against some sudden 
blind resurgence of the savage. 

Take, for instance, the case of Human Sacrifice. The memory 
of a time when human beings had been deliberately slaughtered 
as a way of pleasing God runs through the literature of the fifth 
century as of something far-off, romantic, horrible. We may 
compare it to our own memories of the burning of heretics and 
witches, deeds which we know to have been done quite lately, by 
men very like ourselves, and yet deeds which we can scarcely 
conceive as psychologically possible to any sane being. In just 
the same way, to the earliest of the great Athenians, Aeschylus, 
the sacrifice of Iphigenia is something monstrous, beyond under- 
standing! The man who did it must have been mad. To 
Euripides such acts are generally connected with a study of the 


1 Αἰσχρόμητις τάλαινα παρακοπὰ πρωτοπήμων, Aesch. Ag. 222. But the whole 
passage should be read. 


12 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC I 


worst possibilities of a savage mob, or of scheming kings led by 
malignant and half-insane priests. In an interesting fourth- 
century document, the dialogue called ‘ Minos’, which is attri- 
buted to Plato, human sacrifice is treated as the extreme of 
what is ‘to us unlawful’, and yet, the speaker insists, it was at 
one time and among certain people ‘the law’; and there are 
rumours still, he adds, of strange sacrifices in the secret places of 
Arcadian hills!1_ It is the tone in which we might remind our- 
selves, for instance, that even in the last decade or so women 
have been tortured as witches in the Abruzzi or in Ireland. The 
writer himself, and the society which he addresses, feel them- 
selves entirely remote from such practices. 

And yet how close to them on all sides this abomination 
pressed, closer indeed than they knew! It is not only that it 
continued throughout all antiquity to be practised in times of 
great crises by all the barbarians of the Mediterranean coasts. 
It is not only that we find Hipponax describing the ritual execution 
of the Dharmakoz at Ephesus, a grotesque and possibly a some- 
what cruel business which clearly was a sort of mock human 
sacrifice. Hipponax was a satirist of the sixth century B.C., 
with a liking for horrors, and Ephesus was a partially barbarian 
town. But we find the thing creeping closer than that. In a 
well-known passage of the /vogs Aristophanes ends up a 
passage of comic abuse of certain persons much admired by his 
opponents by saying that, ‘in the old days, people would have 
thought twice before using them as pharmako1r’— Scarecrows,’ 
shall we say? or ‘Guy-Fawkeses’? The word means literally 
‘human medicines’, or ‘scapegoats’. Late and careless writers 
speak as if these Bharmakot were actually sacrificed. But for- 
tunately we happen to have a fragment of an ancient third- 
century historian, Ister, who explains what this odd business 
really amounted to. Two persons, one for the men of the city, 
one for the women, were led out as though to execution. They 


1 p. 315 Ὁ. He refers also to the descendants of Athamas as practising a 
similar sacrifice. But there he is misinformed or, more likely, straining his 
point inthe argument. In the Athamas ritual the victim escaped. See texts 
in Roscher’s Lexicon. Mayer (ib, ii. p. 1509) compares a Pelops-Oenomaus 
ritual in Rhodes, in which the sacrificing priest pursued the victim with a 
eee but was first blindfolded and had to run hand in hand with two small 
children. 


I GREECE AND HUMAN SACRIFICE 13 


wore necklaces, one of white figs, the other of black. They seem 
to have been solemnly presented with cake and figs, and then 
scourged and pelted out of the city-—treated, in fact, very like 
the Lion and the Unicorn. I hasten to add that the scourging 
was done with little twigs and bulbs of the s&//a, or wild squill, 
and the pelting with similar ineffective objects. The victims are 
said to have been volunteers, and chosen for their ugliness ; and 
various smaller details in the ceremony are meant to be grotesque 
and absurd. At the end, the ALarmakor were supposed to be 
dead and their ashes were thrown into the sea. The ceremony 
was an ‘imitation’, says Ister, of a stoning to death.1 

When did it become an imitation? When was it, as it must 
originally have been, a real stoning to death? We cannot say. 
The Human Medicine is the relic of a very ancient, very wide- 
spread, pre-Hellenic barbarity, which the Greeks have not swept 
altogether away, but have allowed to live on with its teeth 
drawn. 

But the abomination creeps closer still. There is a story 
about Themistocles told by Plutarch on the authority of one 
Phanias of Lesbos. Phanias wrote some 200 years after the 
alleged incident, and some of the other stories he tells do not 
command credence: for instance, the statement that once in the 
Chersonese fish came down in the rain.2 Still the story, as he 
tells it, is not incredible. And it exactly illustrates the points 
which I wish to convey. ‘When Themistocles as admiral was 
making the chief sacrifice beside his flag-ship’—this was in the 
last crisis of the Persian invasion, just before the battle of Salamis 
—‘ there were brought up to him three prisoners, men of great 
beauty, gorgeously arrayed and adorned with gold. When 
Euphrantides the prophet "—there is sure to be a prophet in 
such a business !—‘ saw them, since the holy fire at that moment 
burst into a great and brilliant flame, and there was a significant 
sneeze on the right, the prophet clutched Themistocles by the 

} See Appendix A, on the Pharmakoi. The ritual was probably a charm 
for ripening figs; see Paton in Rev. Archéologigue, 1907, p. 51. He argues 
that Adam and _ Eve were φαρμακοί. The word seemed in Greek to be the 
masc. of φάρμακον, ‘medicine’ ; but it was probably a foreign word. Hence 
the a in Ionic, as in Δαρεῖος and other foreign words. In Attic the a is short 
by analogy from φάρμακον. 


? I find that I was wrong to doubt Phanias’s word here. There had been 
a waterspout at sea. 


14 THE. RISE OF ΤΗΝ GREEK EPIC I 


right hand and commanded him to dedicate the young men and 
sacrifice them all, crying on the name of Dionysus Oméstes (the 
Raw-Devourer). ‘Do this,” he said, “and there is deliverance 
and victory for Hellas.” Themistocles was horrified at the 
prophet’s strange and monstrous demand. But, as so often 
happens in great crises and times of suffering, the multitude, 
putting all their hopes in something irrational rather than in 
reason, shrieked to the god with one voice, dragged the 
prisoners to the altar, and, as the prophet commanded, com- 
pelled the whole sacrifice to take place.’ It is not said that 
Themistocles performed the act. (Plut. 7emz. xiii.) 

Now the evidence for the story is weak. Themistocles is both 
the shadiest and the most maligned of great Greek statesmen. 
The whole story may be an outrageous slander invented by his 
enemies after his ostracism. But that scarcely alters its historical 
significance. It was, apparently, a story actually told. It must 
have been, if not true, at least possible—not beyond the bounds 
of credibility to excited persons. 

As a matter of fact, it is just on occasions like this that 
human sacrifices have most tended to occur: in a disorganized 
army or a rabble full of fear, egged on by some fanatical priest or 
prophet. There were bloody doings in Rome when the fear of 
Hannibal was strong, judicial murders of vestal virgins, buryings 
alive of ‘Gallus et Galla, Graecus et Graeca’ in the Forum 
Boarium. (Livy, xxii. 57.) There was a great burning of Jews, 
we may remember, after the earthquake of 1755 at Lisbon. 

Perhaps the most tragic case, however, was the outbreak of 
human sacrifice at Jerusalem in the seventh century, inspired by 
the imminent terror of Assyria. Jews who had been taught to 
believe that Yahweh was their only refuge saw, or seemed to 
see, with despair that their sacrifices were availing nothing. 
They must give Him more: give Him anything in the world, if 
only He will avert the horror of an Assyrian conquest, with its 
pyramids of heads and its prisoners flayed alive. Looking about 
them, these unhappy devotees saw the human sacrifices of Tyre 
and Sidon, and knew that there was still one thing which they 
might offer. No wonder Yahweh did not hear them, when they 
were giving less than the heathen gave! So began the burnings 
of children at the Zopher in the vale of Hinnom, Of course the 


I GREECE AND HUMAN SACRIFICE 15 


practice was denounced by the prophets, and comparatively soon 
ceased. The point to observe is that in Greece, and it would 
seem in Greece alone throughout classical times, we find no 
parallel to this kind of thing. A desperate attempt was made 
by the superstitious party to force a crime of the sort upon 
Pelopidas, in the terrible moments before the battle of Leuctra." 
But it failed. Human sacrifice was barbaric, not Greek. If the 
Themistocles story is true, that one bloody outburst of super- 
stitious fear stands alone. There were other occasions on which 
all the conditions for such a deed seem to have been present. 
Think of Xenophon’s Ten Thousand after Cunaxa: think of 
Nicias’s army after the last battle before Syracuse. All the con- 
ditions for the thing are there; but not the thing. The very 
idea is incongruous to one’s conceptions of Nicias or Xenophon. 
—That is Hellenism. 

Human sacrifice, then, is one of the barbarities which Hellenism 
successfully overcame. It was either abolished entirely or else, 
as in the case of the pharmakor at Athens, reduced to some 
harmless ceremonial which satisfied religious conservatism with- 
out inflicting much harm on human beings. 


But there were other strongholds of the primitive beast in man 
which even Athens was not powerful enough to conquer. To 
take three points: we find among the Greeks the institution of 
slavery, fixed and unshaken ; women in a markedly subject con- 
dition as compared with our own times, though far removed 
again from the seclusion of the East; and lastly, proceeding 
partly from the institution of slavery, partly from certain forms 
of military organization, some startling phenomena of what we 
should call unchastity in the relations of the sexes. And then 
we imagine that these things are characteristically Greek! They 
are just the reverse. They are the remnants of that primaeval 
slime from which Hellenism was trying to make mankind clean. 

The Greeks are not characteristically slave-holders. All the 

1 See Appendix A. The case in Philostratus, Vzt. AZo/. iv. 10, where the 
thaumaturge Apollonius of Tyana, being at Ephesus during a plague, 
recognized a certain deformed beggar as being a demon of pestilence, and 
set the crowd to stone him to death, was a horrid act on the part of an 
unauthorized mob, not a deliberate human sacrifice approved by the law. 


But the Asiatic cities were terribly infected with barbarism by the time 
of Nero. The incident has elements of the harmakos rite in it, 


16 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC I 


world held slaves, and had always done so. The Greeks are 
characteristically the first human beings who felt a doubt or 
scruple about slavery ; who were troubled in mind by it, who 
thought, wrote, schemed, in the face—as far as we can judge—of 
absolutely overmastering social needs, to be rid of it, some two 
thousand years before it was abolished in Christian Europe. I 
do not refer specially to the efforts of isolated reformers. The 
Cynics, we know, condemned slavery root and branch. The 
Stoics and certain religious organizations from the fourth century 
onward refused to recognize its existence, and professed to count 
all men free. Euripides was troubled by it, and can scarcely get 
the subject off his mind. The sophist Alcidamas seems to have 
made a preaching tour round the Peloponnese to induce all states 
to combine in a general emancipation; and, curiously enough, 
was not murdered. But the tone of the non-reforming writers is 
equally interesting as evidence. Homer, though of course no 
thought of doing without slaves ever crosses his horizon, speaks 
always of slaves with a half-puzzled tenderness. Slavery is to 
him a terrible thing that may happen to any man, and will ‘ take 
away half of his manhood’. The heroes are as courteous to the 
slaves, Eumaeus and Eurycleia, as to one another. Plato, bred 
in a far from democratic circle and generally in protest against the 
ideals of the great sophists of the fifth century, does not care to 
denounce slavery. In his ideal δ εῤφόζιε he abolishes it silently 
by merely constructing a state without slaves. In the Laws, 
written in his old age, when the cloud of reaction had settled 
darkly upon his mind, he accepts it as an existing fact and makes 
elaborate regulations for the protection both of slave and of 
master! The attitude of his opponents, the sentimental demo- 


1 See Laws, pp. 777-8. ‘If slavery “takes away half a man’s manhood ” 
how is one to deal with slaves? Some masters utterly mistrust their slaves, 
treat them like wild beasts, with whips and scourges, till they make them 
many times worse than before... . No doubt the human animal is ill- 
tempered, and not at all easy to manage, when you introduce “‘ the necessary 
distinction of servant and master”. It is a bad business; the only rules 
perhaps are not to have slaves of the same country or the same language, 
and then to be scrupulously just in dealing with them, ore so than with your 
equals. The only test of true justice is the way a man behaves to those whom 
he can wrong with impunity. ‘‘Only the unstained can sow seeds for virtue”... 
that is a rule to be remembered by every master and prince and strong man 
in dealing with those weaker than himself.’ It will be noticed that Plato 
does not draw much distinction between ‘servant’ and ‘slave’. He is 


I GREECE AND SLAVERY 17 


crats, can perhaps be deduced from the beginning of his dialogue, 
Euthyphro, or On Piety. The man who gives his name to that 
dialogue is satirized as a type of the pious and ultra-superstitious 
Athenian democrat. When Socrates meets him, Euthyphro is 
going to Athens to prosecute his own father for homicide, 
because the said father has caused, though not intentionally, the 
death of a slave who had killed another. Euthyphro has been 
apparently on the best of terms with his father; he admits that 
he had great provocation, and that the slave probably deserved 
to die. But he will not allow a slave to be murdered any more 
than another man: and, what is more, though he expects to be 
laughed at and thought ‘mad’, he is confident, if he can once 
get a hearing, of winning his case! The father, I should remark 
in passing, would not be put to death. 

It is unfortunate, perhaps, that our principal representative of 
ancient Greece upon this question should be Aristotle. Aristotle | 
is, like Plato, somewhat anti-democratic; and, unlike Plato, 
devoted to common sense. It is his common sense, perhaps, 
that obscures his vision most. He saw that in the existing state 
of society slavery was a necessary institution. Its abolition 
would have meant anarchy, perhaps famine. And Aristotle does 
his best to show that the necessary institution is also just and 
‘according to nature’. It is the same line that was adopted by 
the fathers of the early Christian Church.2, Some men are born 
to obey, others to rule. Put down a dozen Greeks in a bar- 
barous country: in a few months you will find the Greeks giving 
orders and the natives obeying them. But his arguments do not 
matter so much. The important thing is that he found it 
necessary to argue. Slavery could not, to a thoughtful Greek, 
simply rank as an accepted thing. No doubt Aristotle had 
a solid majority behind him: a majority composed of plain men 
who had no intention of seeing their business hampered by 
philosophers, and doubtless of those same obscurantists who 


perhaps more troubled than most moderns by the existence at all of servants 
and masters, though far less troubled by the existence of slavery proper 
as a form of service. 

* Observe how Euthyphro extracts a high moral lesson from the most 
revolting myths of Hesiod: ‘wrong-doing must be punished, however high 
the offender. Zeus did not spare even his own father.’ 

5 Cf. Susemihl and Hicks, Ar. Po/itics, p. 24, n. 4. 

2760 ς 


18 THE “RISE “OF THE GREEK EPIC I 


afterwards prosecuted him for impiety: not a majority of 
philosophers nor idealist democrats. The two most influential 
schools, Cynics and Stoics, stood on the other side. The 
popular writers of the New Comedy! appealed to the public 
with sentimental denunciations of the unnatural thing. 

I do not in the least wish to deny that the slave-trade assumed 
enormous importance in Greece. The slave-trade in later 
antiquity was largely in the hands of the maritime Greek cities, 
just as in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries it was in the 
hands of England, and for the same reason: because the slave- 
trade went with the general carrying trade. Polybius counts 
among the first necessaries of life for a large town ‘cattle and 
slaves’.2 Wheat is mentioned as secondary. And it stands to 
reason that, wherever one set of men have had absolute power 
over another, there must have been cases of extreme cruelty. 
One should remember, however, that Athens, the most Greek 
part of Greece, was remarkable for her gentleness to the slave 
population. It was part of her democratic ideal. Her friends 
praise her, her critics and enemies ridicule her, for making her 
slaves indistinguishable from free men.*? That is something, 
But I think the main point which distinguishes Greece from other 
ancient communities, here as elsewhere, is not something actually 
achieved, but something seen and sought for. In Greece alone 
men’s consciences were troubled by slavery, and right down 
through the centuries of the decadence, when the industrial slave- 
system ruled everywhere, her philosophers never entirely ceased 
protesting against what must have seemed an accepted and 
inevitable wrong. 


1 Cf, Anaxandrides, fr. 4, Philemon, fr. 94 (Kock): especially how God 


> ’ » , , ΄ , 
ἐλευθέρους ἐπόησε πάντας TH φύσει, 
δούλους δὲ μετεπόησεν ἡ πλεονεξία. 


(‘ covetousness transformed them into slaves ’). 

2 iv. 38 Πρὸς μὲν τὰς ἀναγκαίας τοῦ βίου χρείας τά Te θρέμματα καὶ τὸ τῶν εἰς τὰς 
δουλείας ἀγομένων σωμάτων mAjOos—odious language, certainly. 

8. For instance, [Xen.| Respub. Athen. i. τὸ ff. (hostile); Dem. 2 22}. iii. 3 
(friendly) ; Plato, Rep. 563 B (satirical on the licence and self-confidence 
of slaves, male and female, in a democratic state). On the torture of slave 
witnesses, see Appendix B. The best recent discussion of Greek slavery is 
in A. E. Zimmern’s Greek Commonwealth; see also his articles in the 
Sociological Review, Jan. and April, 1909. He distinguishes ‘apprentice 
slavery ’ and ‘chattel slavery’; in Greece we have chiefly the former. [See 
also Heitland Agricol1, 1921, esp. final chapter.] 


I GREECE AND WOMEN 19 


The. Greeks were not characteristically subjectors of women. 
They are the first nation that realized and protested against the 
subjection of women. I speak, of course, of nations in some 
state of social complexity. For in primitive agricultural com- 
munities the women who worked in the fields were in most ways 
as free as men. On this question, again, I should not lay stress 
on the evidence of the isolated reformer. We all know how 
Plato in the Repwbic preached the complete emancipation of 
women from all artificial restrictions whatever. But some time 
before Plato other philosophers,’ and well-known philosophers, 
must have advocated the same ideas, because we find all the 
regular ‘ Woman's Right’ conceptions ridiculed in Aristophanes 
considerably before the Refubiic can have been published. 
And there is this to observe, unless my impressions deceive me: 
Aristophanes, a strong conservative writing broad comedy for the 
public, seems quite to understand the ideas that he is handling. 
He treats them as funny, as offering material for scurrilous jokes, 
but not in the least as things unheard of or incomprehensible. 
He understands his opponents better than, for instance, Mary 
Wollstonecraft was understood by the writers of the 477Z2-Jacobin. 
Before Aristophanes, again, there was Euripides, studying the 
woman's case with persistent insight and eloquence. Euripides 
was a genius too extraordinary to be useful as evidence of what 
his average contemporaries thought; except, indeed, of what 
they must have thought after he had spoken. But consider for 
a moment the whole magnificent file of heroines in Greek tragedy, 
both for good and for evil, Clytemnestra, Antigone, Alcestis, 
Polyxena, Jocasta, even Phaedra and Medea: think of the 
amazing beauty of the Daughters of Ocean in the Prometheus, 
and of the Trojan Women in the play that bears their name. 
They are all of them free women, free in thought and in spirit, 
treated with as much respect as any of the male characters, and 
with far greater minuteness and sympathy. I doubt if there has 


1 I strongly suspect, Protagoras. In Diog. Laert iii. 37 and 57a statement 
is quoted from Aristoxenus and Favorinus (no doubt using Aristoxenus) 
that ‘almost the whole of the Aefwd/ic’ was taken from Protagoras’s 
Antilogica. Aristoxenus is a good authority, though spiteful. If this is at all 
true, the Lysistrata (B.C. 411), and perhaps the Zeclesiazusae (B.C. 392 or 389?), 
must have been aimed at ideas of Protagoras, as the later Gynaecocratiae 
of Amphis and Alexis were aimed at those of the Republic. Cf. Plato, 


Rep. v. p. 457 Ὁ. 
62 


20 THE, RISE OF THE GREK EPIC I 


ever, in the history of the world, been a period, not even 
excepting the Elizabethan age and the nineteenth century, when 
such a gallery of heroic women has been represented in drama. 
And such characters cannot surely have sprung out of a society 
in which no free women existed.' 


The third point is hard to discuss fully, but the explanation of 
it is very similar. A great deal of ancient unchastity comes 
directly from the institution of slavery: for female slavery was, 
in large part, another—and perhaps on the whole a worse—form 
of the custom of prostitution. Much, again, was a mere relic from 
the religious ritual of pre-Hellenic peoples, and much was 
a survival from the times when Greece was invaded and con- 
quered by Northern tribes inadequately provided with women. 
As for the myths, their immorality arises mostly from some very 
simple misunderstandings. Every little valley community was 
apt to count its descent from some local ancestress and the tribal 
god, a being who was often imagined in shapes not human, as an 
eagle, a swan, or a river-bull. A time came when these various 
local gods were gradually merged in the great Achaean master- 
god, Zeus. The process was a thoroughly good and progressive 
one; but it had an unexpected result upon Zeus’s reputation. It 


' Attic Law, in many respects primitive, is markedly so with regard to 
women. A woman was always under the tutelage of the head of her family, 
who would as a rule be her father, or, on his death, her eldest brother. She 
thus had a constant protector against any maltreatment by her husband. 
The guardian could annul the marriage and take her home. She also had 
her own property. On the other hand, a bad guardian could torment a 
woman almost as much as a bad husband can now: e.g. he could get money 
from the husband by threatening to annul the marriage. The father could 
transfer his right of guardianship to the husband, then the wife was under 
her husband’s ‘coverture’, asnow. When he died, the wife either fell under 
the coverture of the next head of her husband’s family, or could be left by 
will to some person of her husband’s—and in practice no doubt her own— 
choice. A great deal of the Attic treatment of women strikes one as 
exaggeratedly romantic. They were to be ‘rulers of the hearth’. They 
blushed at the sight of a strange male. To lose his wife’s esteem was the 
greatest blow that could befall an honourable man. (The man in question 
risked losing it by being caught hiding under a bed to escape the tax- 
gatherer.—Dem. Androz. 53.) Epicharmus the poet was actually fined, in 
Syracuse, for making a broad joke in the presence of his wife. One is 
reminded of the Attic vases in which men are freely caricatured or treated 
realistically, but women nearly always idealized. Family life must have been 
extremely correct, to judge by the rarity of cases or mentions of adultery in 
our rather plentiful law-court literature—On this subject I can now refer to 
Prof. Vinogradoft’s Historical Jurisprudence (Oxford, 1922), especially vol. 2. 


i δυναλι εντ τ οὕ 


I OTHER REMNANTS OF BARBARISM 21 


provided him with a collection of human consorts, and of strange 
disguises, which caused much veil-drawing on the part of the 
religiously-minded and much open laughter among the profane. 

The same sort of explanation applies to those few elements in 
Greek myths or ritual which strike one as cruel. They are 
nearly all of them little hard deposits of ancient barbarity left in 
the outer strata of Hellenism. Take the Marsyas story. The 
Greeks, when they penetrated to the town of Celaenae, deep in 
the heart of Further Phrygia, found a local tradition how a native 
god had flayed alive the native hero or king, Marsyas. The 
origin of the myth is not certain. Dr. Frazer takes Marsyas for 
one of his primitive vegetation-kings, who were slain periodically 
as the harvest is slain, and their skins or some similar relic some- 
times preserved till the next year! It may, again, be a remem- 
brance of some Assyrian conquest ; for the Assyrians when they 
conquered a place often expressed their satisfaction by flaying 
their prisoners alive. However that may be, the guides who 
showed the Greeks round Celaenae, wishing to call their god by 
some name which would be intelligible, had called him Apollo. 
Most barbarian gods were either Apollo or Heracles. So the 
hideous story takes its place on the remote outskirts of Greek 
myth, a thing that was perhaps never believed, and would no 
doubt have been forgotten had not the academic sculptors of the 
fourth century made use of the mythical ‘ flayed man’ to illus- 
trate the distribution of the human muscles, It is the same with 
a dozen other cases. At Apamea, quite close to Celaenae, the 
Asiatic population kept up a very ancient rite of sacrificing divers 
beasts by burning them alive. The Syro-Greek Lucian describes 
the business as something curiously barbarous and uncanny. 
These things are in no sense characteristically Greek. They are 
remnants of the state of things which the highest Greek civili- 
zation up to the end of the fifth century B.C., a small white-hot 
centre of spiritual life in a world of effortless barbarism, tried to 
transform and perished in the attempt.? 

' Attis, Adonis, and Osiris, chap. v. 

* De Dea Syria, 49. Something similar, however, occurred at Patrae in 
Achaia. Cf. Paus. vii. 18, 11. 

5 I will not discuss a third view, the Greek as a Levantine. Many very 


good writers make use of this conception, but I think that, if pressed, it is 
misleading. The much-abused modern Levantine owes his general bad name 


22 THE RISE OF) THE (GREEK EPIC i 


It is then from this point of view that I wish to discuss certain 
parts of Greek poetry : as a manifestation of the spirit of upward 
striving in man, which we roughly describe as Progress. But 
here a further question suggests itself. I feel that many among 
my hearers, especially perhaps among those who care most for 
art and for poetry, will protest against regarding poetry from 
this point of view at all. Science, they will say, progresses: but 
poetry does not. When we call a poem immortal, we mean that 
it is never superseded: and that implies that poetry itself does 
not progress. 

This doctrine, when rigidly held, is apt, I think, to neglect the 
very complex nature of most of the concrete works of poetry. 
One may gladly admit that the essential and undefinable quality 
that we call poetry, the quality of being poetical, is one of the 
eternal things in life. There is something in Homer and the 
Book of Job which cannot be superseded, any more than the 
beauty of a spring morning or the sea or a mother’s love for 
a child can be superseded. But, after all, this essential spirit has 
always to clothe itself in a body of some sort, and that body is 
made up of elements which admit of progress and decay. All 
the intellectual elements of poetry are progressive. Wider fields 
of knowledge may constantly be thrown open to the poet. 
Beauty may be discovered in fresh places. There may be 
increased delicacy, or at least increased minuteness, of observa- 
tion. There is, most important of all, a possibility of change 
in the emotions which form the raw material of poetry. 
Wordsworth was not, perhaps, so great a poet as the Post- 
exilian Isaiah, yet Wordsworth would not have howled for joy 
that ‘ The mountains should be molten with the blood of Edom’. 
to habits which come chiefly from historical causes. He is shifty, servile, 
cowardly, because for centuries he has been held in subjection by somewhat 
ferocious and markedly unintellectual aliens. He has had to live by dodging, 
and has the typical qualities of a subject race. The ancient Greek was him- 
self a ruler, and had on the whole the virtues and vices of rulers. The race 
elements are not the same either. The Levantine, mixed as he is, is not 
largely influenced by fair-haired conquering Northerners. Even the geo- 
graphical conditions, though physically not much changed, are psychologi- 
cally different. The Greeks are still the sailors and traders of the Levant. 
But what is now petty huckstering in obsolete sailing-boats was then the 
work of great adventurers and leaders of men. So that its moral effect on 
the sea-folk was different. (I should add that, as far as my personal know- 


ledge goes, I do not agree with the ordinary wholesale condemnation of the 
Levantines.) 


I POETRY AND PROGRESS 23 


And, still more certainly, the writers of Isaiah would have been 
utterly incapable of taking any interest in the subjects of most 
of Wordsworth’s poems. Poetry, in this way, can be taken both 
as evidence of the progress attained by a society, and as a 
force in its further progress. Indeed, the best poetry provides 
sometimes the strongest, because the most subtle and unsuspected, 
force; and the most delicate, because the most living and 
unconscious, evidence. The conscious moralist often seems 
rather stupid and arbitrary—he is certainly an unpopular 
character—and the conscious legislator perhaps worse. The 
poet has over both of them the immense advantage that he is 
not trying to say what he believes to be good for other people, 
or what he believes that they believe to be good for them, but is 
simply expressing what he himself loves most. 

But what Iam most concerned with now is a rather different 
point. I want to suggest, first, that the mere interest in human 
progress in general is a possible source of poetical inspiration, 
a source quite as real and quite as poetical as any other. And 
secondly, that this particular source of inspiration is rather 
unusually strong in Greek poetry. 

Many critics speak as if for a poet to be interested in progress 
was a sort of disgrace or a confession of prosiness. I disagree ; 
I think human progress may be just as much a true inspiration to 
a poet as the lust of the eye or the pride of life. Of course it is 
not so to all poets: there is very little of it in the final stages of 
Homer, little in Pindar and Catullus, just as there is little in 
Shakespeare or Chaucer. On the other hand, it is the very 
breath of life to Aeschylus, Euripides, and Plato, as it is to 
Shelley or Tolstoy. 

Let us take as an example the last work of Condorcet, written 
by him in hiding when condemned to the guillotine. He first 
intended to write an answer to his false accusers and a justification 
of his political career. And then, in the face of death, that dis- 
cussion somehow seemed to him less important ; and he preferred 
to work upon the subject which he felt to be the greatest in the 
whole world, Ze Progrés de 1 Esprit Humatn, The Progress of 
the Human Spirit. It is much the same subject, ultimately, as 
that of the enormous work projected by the late Lord Acton—a 
history of Human Freedom. An interest in this subject implies, 


24 THE ‘RISE (OF ΤΗΝ “GREEK EPIC I 


I think, at the outset an intense feeling of the value, for good and 
ill, of being alive. Here we are, you and I and the millions of 
men and animals about us, the innumerable atoms that make our 
bodies blown, as it were, by mysterious processes somehow to- 
gether, so that there has happened just now for every one of us 
the wonder of wonders, a thing the like of which never has been 
nor shall be: we have come to life; and here we stand with our 
senses, our keen intellects, our infinite desires, our nerves quivering 
to the touch of joy and pain, beacons of brief fire, it would seem, 
burning between two unexplored eternities: what are we to make 
of the wonder while it is still ours ? 

There is here, first, an interest in human life as a whole, and 
secondly, a desire to make it a better thing than it is, That is, 
we shall find two main marks of this spirit: First, what is properly 
called realism ; though the word is so constantly misused that we 
had better avoid it. I mean, a permanent interest in life itself, 
and an aversion to unreality or make-believe. (This is not in- 
consistent with an appreciation of the artistic value of convention. 
We shall have opportunities of considering that point in detail.) 
Secondly, a keen feeling of the values of things, that some things 
are good and others bad, some delightful, others horrible; and a 
power of appreciating, like a sensitive instrument, the various 
degrees of attraction and repulsion, joy and pain. 

Here we run upon one of the great antitheses of life, and one 
which, it seems to me, is largely solved by the progressive, or I 
may say, by the Hellenic spirit ; the antitheses between asceticism 
or Puritanism on the one hand, and the full artistic appreciation 
of life on the other. In real life and in literature these two spirits 
fight a good deal. But both, of course, are parts of one truth 
If life is to be enriched and ennobled, you must first of all have an 
appreciation of life. A man who refuses to feel and enjoy life 
destroys it at its very heart. On the other hand, any strict Puritan 
can always point to an immense amount of wreckage produced 
by great appreciation of the joys of life, and also to a large 
amount of good safe living produced by the principles of avoiding 
pleasure, dulling the desires, and habitually pouring cold water 
into your own and other people’s soup, ‘ to take the Devil out of 
it. There is plenty of opportunity for dispute here in real life. 
In speculation there seems to me to be none. The truth simply 


I PURITAN AND ARTIST 25 


is that in order to get at one desirable end you have to sacrifice 
another, The artistic side of man insists upon the need of under- 
standing and appreciating all good and desirable things: the 
ascetic side insists on the need of a power to resist, a power even 
to despise and ignore, every one of them, lest they should hinder 
the attainment of something better, 

The combination of these two, the appreciation of good things 
and the power to refuse them, is characteristic of the spirit of 
progress. I think most scholars will admit that it is also eminently 
characteristic of Greek civilization. The enjoyment and appreci- 
ation of life is too deeply writ on all Greek poetry to need any 
illustration, though one might refer to the curious power and 
importance in Greek life of two words, Κάλλος and Σ᾽ οφία, Beauty 
and Wisdom; to the intensity of feeling which makes ᾿Ελπίς, 
Hope, or Τόλμα, the Love of Daring, into powers of temptation 
and terror rather than joy: to the constant allegorizing and trans- 
figuration of those two gods of passion, Dionysus and Erés.!_ But 
the principle of asceticism was at least equally strong. Whether 
we look to precept or to practice, the impression is the same. 
In practice a respectable ancient Greek allowed himself some 
indulgences which a respectable modern would refuse: but for 
the most part his life was, by our standards, extraordinarily 
severe and frugal. To take one instance. Hippocrates, the great 
fifth-century physician,? says in one passage that many doctors 
object to their patients having more than one meal in the twenty- 
four hours: but for his own part, he thinks that, though to most 
healthy people it makes no difference whether they have two 
meals or one, still some slow digesters cannot stand more than 
one, while other delicate persons are positively the better for two! 
Our healthy persons have four; and our invalids fall not far short 
of adozen. All the great schools of philosophy, again, were in 
various degrees ascetic. The general admiration felt by the 
ancients for every form of frugality and hardihood strikes one as 
altogether extreme. The praises of Sparta show us how severity 
of life, coupled with courage, sufficed in the popular judgement 
to cover a multitude of sins. Yet Greek asceticism is never like 


1 These points are excellently brought out in Cornford’s Thucydides 
Mythistoricus, chap. ix, xii, xiii. 
? De Vet, Med. 10=p. 593, μονοσιτέειν and ἀριστῆν are the alternatives. 


26 THE: RISE’ OF THE ‘GREEK? EPIC 


Eastern asceticism. The East took its asceticism in orgies, as it 
were ; in horrors of self-mutilation, bodily and mental, which are 
as repellent in their way as the corresponding tempests of rage 
or of sensuality. Greek asceticism, though sometimes mystical, 
was never insane. It was nearly always related to some reason- 
able end, and sought the strengthening of body and mind, not 
their mortification. . 

One cannot but think, in this connexion, of that special virtue 
which the early Greeks are always praising, and failure in which 
is so regretfully condemned, the elusive word which we feebly 
translate by ‘ Temperance’, Séphrosyné. The meaning of sdphro- 
syné can only be seen by observation of its usage—a point we 
cannot go into here. It is closely related to that old Greek rule 
of Μηδὲν ἄγαν, Nothing too much, which seems to us now rather 
commonplace, but has in its time stayed so many blind lusts and 
triumphant vengeances. It is something like Temperance, Gentle- 
ness, Mercy; sometimes Innocence, never mere Caution: a temper- 
ing of dominant emotions by gentler thought. But its derivation 
is interesting. The adjective σώφρων or σαόφρων is the correla- 
tive of ὀλοόφρων, a word applied in early poetry to wizards and 
dangerous people. ᾿Ολοόφρων means ‘ with destructive thoughts ’, 
σώφρων means ‘with saving thoughts’. Plutarch,’ writing when 
the force of the word was dead, actually used this paraphrase to 
express the same idea. There is a way of thinking which destroys 
and a way which saves. The man or woman who is séphrou 
walks among the beauties and perils of the world, feeling the 
love, joy, anger, and the rest ; and through all he has that in his 
mind which saves.— Whom does it save? Not him only, but, as 
we should say, the whole situation. It saves the imminent evil 
from coming to be. 

It is then in this light that I wish to consider certain parts of 
Greek poetry: as embodying the spirit of progress, that is, of 
both feeling the value and wonder of life and being desirous to 
make it a better thing: and further, with that purpose in view, 
as combining a spirit of intense enjoyment with a tempering 
wisdom, going into seas of experience steered by Sophrosyné. 


1 De Tranquillitate, 470 D νοῦν σωτήρια φρονοῦντα. ᾿Ολούῴφρων is used of 
Minos, Aietes, Atlas—also of a hydra, lion, and boar. 


II 
ΤῈ MIGRATIONS: THE POLIS 


ΙΕ we regard Greece as the cradle of European civilization, we 
cannot help some feeling of surprise at its comparative lack of 
antiquity. True, we have evidence of a civilization existing in 
Crete and the Islands of the Aegean as far back as the end of the 
Stone Age. But, for one thing, our knowledge of this civilization, 
though based on abundant and skilfully sifted material, remains 
enigmatic and conjectural, inasmuch as it depends upon our 
interpretation of the stones, not upon literature: and, what is 
more important, it is emphatically not the civilization that we call 
Greek. I do not mean only or especially that the builders of 
the earliest Cretan palaces were, as far as we can judge, of differ- 
ent race and language from the Greeks. I mean that this civiliza- 
tion, so far as we know it, has few or none of the special marks 
that we associate with Hellenism. But of that hereafter. In any 
case there lies between the prehistoric palaces of Crete, Troy, or 
Mycenae, and the civilization which we know as Greek, a Dark 
Age covering at least several centuries. It is in this Dark Age 
that we must really look for the beginnings of Greece. 

In literature and in archaeology alike we are met with the 
same gap. There is a far-off island of knowledge, or apparent 
knowledge; then darkness ; then the beginnings of continuous 
history. At Troy there are the remains of no less than six cities 
one above the other. There was a great city there before 
2000 B.C., the second of the series. It used red ware for its 
pottery, wherever the first city had used black, and it seems to 
have traded the newly discovered copper of the South-East 
against amber from the Baltic. In this second city there was dis- 
covered a fragment of white nephrite, a stone not hitherto found 
anywhere nearer than China, and testifying to the distances 
which trade could travel by slow and unconscious routes in carly 


28 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC I 


times. That city was destroyed by war and fire; and others 
followed. The greatest of all was the sixth city, which we may 
roughly identify with the Troy of Greek legend. Of this city 
we can see the wide circuit, the well-built stone walls, the terraces, 
the gates, and the flanking towers. We have opened the treasure 
houses and tombs, and have seen the great golden ornaments 
and imports from the East. Then we see the marks of flame on 
the walls: and afterwards what? One struggling attempt at a 
seventh city ; a few potsherds to mark the passage of some genera- 
tions of miserable villages ; and eventually the signs of the Greek 
town of New Ilion, many hundreds of years later and well within 
the scope of continuous history. 

It is thesame in Crete. City upon city from prehistoric times 
onward flourishing and destroyed ; palace upon palace, beginning 
with the first building of Cnossos, in a peculiar non-Hellenic 
architecture ; proceeding to those vast and intricate foundations 
in which Sir Arthur Evans finds a palace, a citadel, and a royal 
city round about, the growth and accumulation of many hundreds, 
perhaps thousands, of years. The ornamentation of the walls is 
there, telling of the rise and decay of a whole system of decorative 
art: fragments of early religion, the Bull-God or Minotaur 
seated upon his throne; the ‘horns of consecration’ bristling 
everywhere ; the goddess Πότνια θηρῶν, Queen of Wild Beasts, 
now bearing a dove upon her head, now twined with serpents ; 
sometimes in human shape, sometimes a mere stone pillar erect 
between her rampant lions: sometimes a monstrous fetish. 
There is the Divine Battle-Axe, that Labrandeus from whose 
name the fable of the labyrinth seems to have arisen!: a being 
who has not yet reached human shape or separate existence as a 
‘God’, but exists simply in the ancient bronze axes, scores of 
which remain driven into the rock of the Dictaean cave, over- 
crusted with a stalactite growth of stone, testifying to a worship 
forgotten and uncomprehended. There are porcelains reminding 
one of Babylon, ornaments from Egypt, marks of a luxurious 
king’s court, a gaming-table inlaid with gold and coloured 

1 See, however, on the Labyrinth, Lecture V below, p. 138, note?, and 
especially Burrows, Zhe Discoveries in Crete, pp. 107-32. He connects 
λαβύρινθος with λαύρα and Λαύρειον. (So, I believe, did Wiedemann.) The 


catastrophe which I am specially considering is, of course, that of ‘ Late 
Minoan III’, 


ee ee rr ee a Πρ πὴ πε 


II THE PRE-HELLENIC REMAINS 29 


marbles, women acrobats, bull-fights, or perhaps, if we look 
close, something more barbaric than bull-fights—boys and girls 
thrown for the ‘ Bull of Minos’ to gore: then shattered gates, 
flame-blackened walls and evidences of calamity, a feeble pulsing 
of life outside the ruined palaces, and afterwards silence. 
Centuries later a new Crete emerges, a Dorian island, rigid, self- 
centred, uninfluential, in the full light of Greek history. 

It is the same with the cities of the Argive plain, Mycenae and 
Tiryns. They possessed less importance, and were inhabited 
for a less vast stretch of history, than the cities of Cnossos and 
Troy.1 But the treasures yielded to the excavator, especially in 
Mycenae, are very great in proportion to the importance of the 
town, and the historical problem is simpler. We all know the 
Mycenaean remains: the Lion Gates, the earlier shaft graves, 
and the later vaulted graves; the remains of mummified kings ; 
the skeletons in masks of gold, with their weapons, their drinking- 
bowls, and sometimes the ashes of burnt sacrifice lying beside 
them. And in the end, as in Troy and Cnossos, the marks of 
flame upon the walls, traces of a dwindling population still 
hovering about the old town, and quickly degenerating in the 
arts of civilized life; and then a long silence. 


Such is the evidence of the stones. And that of literature 
corresponds with it. There is an extraordinary wealth of 
tradition about what we may call the Heroic Age. Agamemnon 
king of Mycenae and Argos, Priam king of Troy, and the kings 
surrounding them, Achilles, Aias, Odysseus, Hector, Paris, these 
are all familiar household words throughout later history. They 
are among the best-known names of the world. But how 
suddenly that full tradition lapses into silence! The Epic Saga 
—I mean the whole body of tradition which is represented in 
Epic poetry—the Epic Saga can tell us about the deaths of 
Hector, of Paris, of Priam; in its later forms it can give us all 
the details of the last destruction of Troy. Then no more; 
except a few dim hints, for instance, about the descendants of 
Aeneas. 

It is more strange in the case of Mycenae and Sparta. 


1 Under Tiryns an earlier city has recently been discovered. See W. 
Dorpfeld, Athen. Mitth. 1907. 


30 THE ‘RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC iT 


Agamemnon goes home in the full blaze of legend: he is 
murdered by Aegisthus and Clytemnestra, and avenged by his 
son Orestes: so far we have witnesses by the score. But then? 
What happened to Mycenae after the death of Aegisthus? No 
one seems to know. There seems to be no Mycenae any more. 
What happened in Sparta after Menelaus and Helen had taken 
their departure to the islands of the blest? There is no record, 
no memory. 

In Crete there is less tradition altogether. One great name, 
Minos, forms the centre of all Cretan legends. Minos is never 
quite flesh and blood, like the Homeric heroes, Agamemnon or 
Achilles. He is almost like that more than shadowy personage, 
Creon, whose name means ‘ruler’ and who appears in so many 
myths of the mainland whenever a mere ‘ruler’, and nothing 
more, is wanted. We meet Minos in many different generations, 
in many different characters, most of them probably possessing 
some historical significance. He is the son of Zeus, or, still more 
august, not the son but the ‘ gossip’ or familiar friend of Zeus, 
a suitable position for the hereditary Priest-King, himself an 
incarnation of the Cretan Bull-God.! He is the Just Judge of 
the Underworld, as befits the great legislator who was the 
fountain of law to many islands and dependencies. Again, he is 
the bloody tyrant of the Theseus myth, who gives the seven 
youths and seven maidens to his man-slaying Bull. The reason 
for that is painted on the walls of his labyrinthine palace, showing 
—apparently—Minoan ladies looking on while the Bull is played 
with and maddened by skilled performers till he is let loose on 
his victims. Then again we have the boasting Minos of the 
Bacchylides poem; the mere royal father of the lost Cretan 
prince, Glaucus; the father or husband of many guilty and 
romantic Cretan heroines, Phaedra, Ariadné, Pasiphaé. 

After Minos, what is there? Idomeneus in the Z/ad, a hero of 


1 Διὸς μεγάλου ὀαριστής, τ 179: cf. Plato, AZinos 319 Ὁ. See below, 
Lecture V, p. 136 and note there. I suspect that Minos was a name like 
‘ Pharaoh’ or ‘ Caesar’, given to all Cretan kings of a certain type, and, further, 
that the king was held to be the personification or incarnation of the Bull-God. 
As to the evidence for a Minos existing at different dates, Prof. Burrows 
remarks that the Parian Marble puts Minos in the fifteenth century B.C. and 
also in the thirteenth, and that Diodorus (iv. 60) and Plutarch (172. 7.265. 20) 
tell a similar story. See, however, Ridgeway, ‘Minos the Destroyer, &c.’, 
Proceedings of Brit. Acad, 1V. 


Il THE PRE-HELLENIC TRADITIONS 31 


the second rank, a man grey on the temples, too old to run but 
not too old to deal terrific blows, and withal a little grim and cruel. 
There is also another significant feature. Nearly all the false 
stories told by Odysseus in the Odyssey are tales of Crete, as is 
also the true romance of the life of Eumaeus the swineherd. 
The later proverb associated Crete with ‘romancing’. Was it 
that Crete was full of stories of a past greatness which to the 
ordinary forgetful world seemed merely incredible, as Juvenal 
afterwards sneered at ‘ Graecia mendax’ because Herodotus had 
preserved more ancient history than he could believe? So near 
had Minoan Crete come to complete oblivion.! 

In Thebes, as in Troy, the tradition is more intelligible because 
it explicitly leads up to a catastrophe. Many problems require 
to be cleared up about the Theban traditions, even after Bethe’s 
work upon the subject. The prehistoric remains, as we said 
above, are not prominent or remarkable, chiefly, no doubt, 
because the place was never left for a long time deserted. It is 
with Thebes as with Argos, with Athens, with the many sites of 
towns on the coast of Asia Minor and the Italian Riviera, 
Continuous occupation has destroyed gradually and surely the 
remains of every successive period. But the Theban traditions, 
as preserved in literature, are particularly rich, and they lead up 
clearly to our Dark Age or Period of Ignorance. There is first 
a strange race, Cadmeans, the people of Cadmus, ‘ the Eastern 
Man,’ in possession of the city. The tradition is clearly not of 
their making, for they are credited with all the crimes and 
pollutions in the calendar: especially sexual crimes, which people 
always impute to their enemies. Three generations of the 
Cadmeans, Laius, Oedipus, and the sons of Oedipus, between 
them commit pretty well all the crimes that can be committed in- 
sideafamily. Unnatural affections, child murder, father murder, 

1 Cf. Hdt. vii. 171. Crete had formerly been ‘emptied’ by an expedition 
of Minos to Sicily. Then ‘in the third generation after the death of Minos 
came the Trojan wars... . After the return from Troy there came famine and 
pest slaying both man and beast, and Crete was made empty a second time. 
Then came the present Cretans’—i.e. the Dorian tribes—‘ and inhabited it, 
together with the survivors.’ 

_ 7? Heb. DIP gedem, the east. Greek tradition calls them ‘ Phoenicians’, but 
it 15 not clear what that term exactly denotes. Ridgeway thinks they were 
‘red’ Thracians (Early Age, p. 629). Cf. his ‘Who were the Dorians?’ in 


Anthr. Essays to E. δὲ Tylor (1907). See, after Beloch and Bérard, Burrows, 
Op. cit., p. 141 f. 


32 THE RISE (OF THE GREEKOERPIG I 


incest, a great deal of hereditary cursing, a double fratricide, and 
a violation of the sanctity of dead bodies—when one reads such 
a list of charges brought against any tribe or people, either in 
ancient or in modern times, one can hardly help concluding that 
somebody wanted to annex their land.!_ And this was doubtless 
the case. The saga gives us full details up to the quarrel of 
Eteocles and Polynices and the Expedition of the Seven Greek 
Champions, the chariot-fighting on the plain and the assault on 
the Gates. The seven were defeated: so far we hear all at 
length. Then much more briefly, with much less reality, we 
are told that their sons made another expedition and took 
Thebes. That is, the citadel of the Cadmeans eventually fell, 
and nothing more is said or known. 

It is the same wherever we turn our eyes in the vast field of 


Greek legend. The ‘heroes’ who fought at Thebes and Troy . 


are known; their sons are just known by name or perhapsa little 
more: Diomedes, Aias, Odysseus, Calchas, Nestor, how fully the 
tradition describes their doings, and how silent it becomes after 
their deaths ! 


Let us consider these destroyed cities a little closer. We can 
perhaps make out the kind of civilization on which their 
greatness rested, and the causes of their fall. For observe 
this: though we can see in some cases from the evidence of the 
stones that these cities came at last to a violent end, it is by no 
means clear that it was any definite shock of war which really 
destroyed the Aegean civilization. There is no tradition at all 
that the realm of Minos was sacked in war®: no real tradition 
of the sack of Mycenae. And even in the cases of Troy and 


1 There is also extant a simpler version, before the self-defensive slanders 
had been developed, in which the heroes are slain at Thebes simply μήλων 
ἕνεκ᾽ Οἰδιπόδαο (Hes. Exga, 162), in an honest cattle-raid. 

2 Mr. J. L. Myres reminds me of Plutarch’s story of ‘Tauros the sea- 
captain’, who was the real lover of Pasiphae, and his sea-fight off Cnossos. 
This is possibly a very faint echo of a real tradition (Vit. 7hes. xix and 
preceding capp.). There would be no great siege in any case, since Cnossos 
and Phaestus were open unfortified cities ; their fall would follow quickly on 
the destruction of the Minoan fleet. Sir A. Evans however doubts whether the 
sack of Cnossos and Phaestus was the work of a foreign army at all (2. .S. A. 
xi. p. 14) He suggests that both Palaces may have been destroyed by 
earthquake at the time of the great’ volcanic eruption which destroyed 
Santorin. 


II HOW DID THE Chins BALL? 33 


Thebes the testimony is suspicious. The Epos must say that 
Troy eventually was taken, but the Epos knows that Achilles did 
not take it, but failed and was slain. A son of Achilles, a mere 
replica of Achilles, has been invented to come afterwards and 
take it. Of course the //zad as it now stands implies the future 
fall of the city, but it need not have done so in an earlier form. 
Nor need the Odyssey. The disastrous returns of the Greek 
heroes and the fall of the house of Agamemnon point rather to 
an unsuccessful expedition than to a great conquest. And how 
does it happen, one may ask, that so many Greek lays were based 
on the subject of ‘ Wraths’, or quarrels between leading chiefs, 
between Agamemnon and Achilles, Odysseus and Agamemnon, 
Odysseus and Aias, Achilles and Odysseus? Does it not look— 
I take the suggestion from Prof. Bury—as if there was need of an 
excuse for some great failure? At any rate the actual tale of the 
Sack of Troy, though immensely influential in later literature, 
does not seem to be recorded in any very early form of the saga. 
And even incidents which have a special air of verisimilitude 
about them, like the stratagem of the Wooden Horse,! may 
represent only a brilliant afterthought of what ought to have 
been done, I lay no stress on this point, except to suggest that 
it is curious, if the war really ended in success, that the great 
national saga in its early forms should not tell of the success, 
but only of disastrous ‘Returns’, together with a quarrel, or 
several quarrels, between the chiefs—incidents well calculated to 
excuse failure. 

Exactly the same thing is the case with the Theban tradition. 
A great expedition against Thebes is well known to the Epos, 
that of the Seven Chieftains, led by the far-famed Adrastus. 
That expedition, we are told, was defeated and all the seven slain. 
‘Only,’ the story adds, ‘ Thebes did fall in the end. Some people 
who came afterwards took it. The names of these later comers 
are not very certain. They are only the ‘ Ekgonoi’ or ‘Epigonoi’,? 
the ‘ men-born-after’, more shadowy even than Pyrrhus-Neopto- 
lemus, son of Achilles. The general result seems to me to suggest 
that, in the first place, the Epic tradition of the Greeks knew of 


* I suggest that it may refer to a siege tower of the Assyrian type. My 
translation of Ze Trojan Women, p. 86. 


* "Exyovot, Eur, Suppliants, 1224. ᾿Ἐπίγονοι is of course the usual name. 
2760 D 


34 THE RISE OF THE GREER ENG II 


certain heroic expeditions against Thebes and Troy, but knew 
also of their defeat ; and secondly, this tradition had much later 
to be combined with the fact that in reality Troy and Cadmean 
Thebes had ceased to be. Can we see anything in the historical 
conditions which makes such a hypothesis probable? 

I suggest, to put it briefly, that these great fortress-cities 
depended for their greatness upon industry and commerce, and 
that during the period of persistent barbarian invasions industry 
and commerce were destroyed. They resisted successfully the 
direct shock of war; but were gradually undermined by poverty. 
All of them, as a matter of fact, are situated at the junctions 
of important trade routes. Crete, for instance, a rough and 
mountainous island, credited by Strabo with ‘some fruitful glens’, 
is geographically, in Sir A. Evans’s phrase (/. H. 8. xiv), ‘the 
stepping-stone of continents,’ lying in the mid-route between 
west and east,! between southand north. The Cnossian treasury 
records seem to speak of a large trade in oil and silphium, as well 
as horses and cattle and precious metals. They had already 
invented, it would seem, the talent and the drachma. The lines 
from Phoenicia and the great Babylonian Az7¢erdand, from Egypt, 
from Libya, all tended to join at Crete on the way to the West, 
the Northern Aegean, or the Black Sea.2 Some centralizing 
power then must have arisen in the island, and the maritime trade 
of such harbours as Kydonia and Hierapytna—the east of the 
island seems to have remained isolated—served to support the 
great central city of Cnossos. Thebes, again, as Strabo explains, 
commanded the roads between three seas, the Northern Aegean, 
the Southern Aegean, and the Corinthian Gulf. 

But let us consider the point more in detail in two cases where 
it is not so easily seen. 

Mycenae, as M. Victor Bérard has well explained, is what is 
called in Turkish a Dervenajz; that is, a castle built at a juncture 
of mountain passes for the purpose of levying taxes on all traffic 
that goes through. There is the rich plain of Argos opening 
southward to the sea. At the north of it are mountains; beyond 


1 See also Hogarth’s address to the Royal Geographical Society, 1906. A 
road running north and south has since been discovered. 

2 p. 400, from Ephorus. See also Bérard, Les Phéniciens et Ζ᾽ Odyssée, 
i. 225f. Compare, for what follows, pp. 11 f. (Mycenae) and 79 f. (Troy). 


Π POSITIONS ΟΕ MYCENAE AND TROY κ55 


them the plain of Corinth and Sikyon opening on the Corinthian 
Gulf. Among these mountains, at the north-east corner of the 
Argive valley, with no sea near, and no arable land anywhere 
about it, stands this isolated castle of Mycenae, thickly walled 
and armed to the teeth. It is hard to see how such a place could 
live, and why it needed such military preparations, until we observe 
that it forms the meeting-point of a very ancient system of artificial 
roads, cut and built of stone, and leading from the Argive plain 
to the Corinthian, from the southern sea to the northern. If 
Mycenae stood alone, she formed a sort of robber stronghold, 
which lived by levying blackmail on all the trade that passed. 
But almost certainly she did not stand alone, and M. Berard’s 
explanation is only a part of the truth. Agamemnon was master 
of a large realm, including ‘all Argos and many islands’, and 
Mycenae stood at the centre of it, able to keep open the trade 
routes between the northern and southern seas, and ready to strike 
with horse and foot in any direction where defence was needed. 
Paved roads, as Eduard Meyer has pointed out, are meant for the 
passage of chariots, not merely of caravans; and whether or no 
the commerce along these roads was anything considerable—a 
point which depends largely on unsettled questions about Corinth 
—Dr. Leaf is clearly right in regarding Mycenae as built more 
for war than for commerce.! 

M. Bérard’s explanation of Troy is even more instructive, though 
it also looks rather different on further consideration. It has to 
be modified by the observed fact that Troy does not show great 
affinities with the islands, and does with Thrace and its own 
hinterland, But there is more in it than that. 

Six cities were built on that particular site, and six destroyed. 
There must have been some rare attraction about the place, and 
some special reason for destroying the cities built there. Greek 
legend, in speaking of the destruction of Troy by Agamemnon, 
always remembered that it had been destroyed before, though it 
ran all the previous expeditions into one—when old Telamon 
rose from his rest in Salamis, and gave himself to Heracles 


1 See Leaf, Homer and History, 220-8: E. Meyer, Gesch. d@. Alt. ii. 170, 
180. Leaf thinks there would be very little commerce on these roads, at any 
rate if Corinth was not in existence in Mycenaean times, a point on which 
the excavations are not conclusive. (Allen, Catalogue, p. 64.) 


Dy 2 


36 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC Π 


For the wrecking of one land only, 
Of Ilion, Ilion only, 
Most hated of lands.! 


Tradition tells us that Heracles went ‘because of Laomedon’s 
horses’? and M. Félix Sartiaux has pointed out in his book on 
the present domain of Troy that ‘sa principale industrie est 
l’élevage de chevaux’. The Trojans in the //ad have, like Hector 
himself, the special epithet of ‘horse-taming’, and have almost a 
monopoly of names compounded with -:77os.* But horses were 
not the whole of Priam’s wealth. Strabo (p. 680) speaks of ‘ gold 
mines in Astyra near Abydos, of which little is left now, though 
great slag-heaps and excavations are evidence of ancient working’, 
But a larger stream of riches, and a far stronger cause of unpopu- 
larity, lay well within reach of Priam’s walls. 

We know that in later times there was a vast body of trade 
passing up the Hellespont, joining Mediterranean civilization 
with that of the Black Sea. Obviously a city commanding this 
trade would grow rich: but Troy does not seem at first sight 
to be in the right position for commanding it. The older 
city, Dardania, had lain higher up on Mount Ida, the 7 χα tells 
us (Y 218), in safe retirement. But asthe Trojans grew stronger, 
or as they discovered a more tempting source of wealth, they 
ventured nearer the sea. Yet even so Troy lies some miles inland 
on the slopes of a hill commanding only a narrow swampy plain 
with sea at each end of it. In modern times such a position is 
not of much worth. But in the conditions of ancient seafaring it 
was priceless, 

Down the Bosphorus and the Hellespont there blows an almost 
incessant wind and there flows an extraordinarily strong current. 
If you bathe in the sultry heat down below Tenedos, near Mytilene, 
you may find yourself suddenly in swift and almost icy water 


τ Eur. 7voades, 806 (sentiment of the whole passage, rather than any definite 
words): cf. 1241 Τροία re πόλεων ἔκκριτον μισουμένη. 

2 E. 640 ἕνεχ᾽ ἵππων Λαομέδοντος, Eur. 770. 806 ff. ἀτυζόμενος πώλων. 

8 See Sartiaux, 77026 (1915), p. 130: Prof. Grace Macurdy, C. Q. Jan. 1923. 
“ἽἹππόδαμοι in pl. occurs twenty-three times, always of the Trojans ; their allies 
are Θρήικες ἱπποπόλοι, Παίονες ἱπποκορυσταί, Φρύγες ἱππομάχοι. The horse is 
said to have been introduced by the ‘tumulus-people’ (Mongol nomads) from 
the steppes of Asia in the third millennium B.C., when they first learnt to ride 
and drive horses as well as to live on the milk of mares. See Myres in Cam- 
bridge Ancient History, i, pp. 106 ff. On Trojan chariots see note p. 152. 


I POSITIONS OF MYCENAE AND TROY a 


sweeping straight from Russia. This current is at its strongest just 
off Cape Sigeum, the promontory in front of Troy. At the 
present time small steamers have some trouble in passing there, 
and sailing ships can be seen waiting by the score under the lee 
of Tenedos, till by utilizing stray puffs of favourable wind they 
can tack round that difficult cape, and, proceed by hugging the 
eastern shore. In ancient times, when boats were small and 
voyages short, their difficulties were much greater. The greatest 
of all was the absence of galvanized iron tanks to hold drinking- 
water. An ancient ship carried its water in heavy earthenware 
jars, and if it was weatherbound for a few days on a waterless 
coast the results were disastrous. 

Now, M. Bérard’s view was that, though it does not look so 
on the map, the plain of Troy is really an isthmus, or at least a 
formation to which he can apply his famous ‘ Law of the Isthmus’. 
Ancient cargoes were so light,and ancient ships so little accustomed 
to long voyages, that in numerous cases where we should make a 
longer voyage in order to avoid trans-shipment and ‘ breaking 
bulk’ the ancients made straight for the nearest land, unpacked 
their bales on to the backs of mules or men, and reshipped them 
again at the nearest sea. On many isthmuses they even dragged 
the ships overland rather than make a further round by water- 
Thus, M. Bérard suggested that merchants wishing to trade with 
the Black Sea ports disembarked their cargo at the southern 
end of the narrow swampy plain, carried it across on mules and 
re-embarked it on the further side, paying heavy taxes to Priam 
or Laomedon as they passed; and that this is the origin of the 
wealth of Troy. In reality, however, as Dr. Leaf has shown,! 
this does not seem to have been the ancient practice. Traffic 
from the south, if it wished to avoid the Etesian winds and the 
Black Sea currents, took to the land much earlier, at Assos. By 
St. Paul’s day this old track had developed into a Roman road 
from Troas to Assos, along which he travelled. He was then 
going from north to south, so most of the party preferred to go 
by sea, with the current (Acts xx, 13). 

The real clue to the importance of Troy in Mycenaean times is 
the fact that it ceased to be important as soon as there were 
Greek settlements up the Hellespont and on the Black Sea. 

1 Leaf, Zvoy, pp. 254-85. 


38 THE RISE OF THE GREEK ERIC I 


When once there were friends along the coast, Greek ships passed 
freely up to the Euxine, and allowed no blackmailing power to 
grow up again at the mouth of the Hellespont or on the Black 
Sea. Before that time, with the currents and wind against them, 
and no fresh water except in the Scamander, Greek ships had not 
been able to pass into the Hellespont except by permission of 
Priam. In all probability they did not pass at all. The plain of 
Troy was the actual meeting-place where the trade of the Euxine 
touched that ofthe Aegean. Certainly the allies of Troy described 
in Ziad B seem to live on a network of trade routes, and in 
pondering on the great quantities of silver found in the Second 
City one cannot but remember the allies or vassals who came ‘ from 
far-off Alybé, where silver is born’! Priam’s misfortunes were 
so great that tradition is kind to him. But the perjuries and 
extortions of Laomedon ring loud in legend. Was it simply 
because the toll at the Hellespont was too oppressive to be 
tolerated, that all maritime Greece felt involved in the oppression, 
and volunteered to destroy the blackmailing citadel again and 
again? Or was it, more simply still, that the position was so 
valuable that one band after another of northern warriors, 
Thracians, Dardans, Troes, Teukri, Phrygians, Achaeans, fought 
for the possession ? 

There are many problems still waiting solution about these 
fortified centres of exchange, if I may so call them. How far did 
they form a uniform empire or federation? Was Mycenae normally 
an outpost of Crete or an enemy of Crete, or when did it change 
from the one to the other? What relation did either of them 
bear towards Troy, or towards the prevailing powers in Asia? 
Of what race or races were their kings? How far was there a 
conscious difference between the ‘ Minoan’ or Island race with its 
sea-coast settlements and the less advanced masses of Anatolian 
or ‘ Hittite’ peoples of the hinterlands? Inany case it is, I think, 
perfectly clear that this Aegean civilization was not what we call 
Greek. Its language was, as far as we can judge, not Greek. 
Its art, though we can recognize in it many of the elements that 
went to the making of Greek Art, was in itself not Greek. As 
a matter of fact there were no Greeks in the world in those days, 
any more than there were, let us say, Englishmen before the 

1 B. 857 τηλόθεν ἐξ ᾿Αλύβης ὅθι τ' ἀργύρου ἐστὶ γενέθλη. 


I COMMERCIAL EMPIRES 39 


Angles came into Britain, or Frenchmen before the Franks 
invaded Gaul. The Greek people was a compound of which 
the necessary constituents had not yet come together. 

We must recognize, however, that the existence of such rich 
and important centres, dependent entirely upon sea-borne 
commerce, argues both a wide trade and a considerably high 
and stable civilization. We must not forget that piece of white 
nephrite which, so archaeologists daringly assure us, came to 
Troy all the way from China. And we must by no means regard 
the masters of these cities as mere robber chieftains or levyers 
of blackmail. Commerce dies if it is too badly treated; and 
Aegean commerce lived and flourished for an extremely long 
time. 


These empires, if we may call them by so large a name, were 
broken up by migrations or invasions from the north. In early 
times, so Thucydides tells us, all Hellas was in a state of 
migration.! We hear of all sorts of migrant tribes; of Hellenes, 
Achaioi, and Pelasgoi; of Carians and Leleges; of Minyae ; of 
the sons of Deucalion, Ion, Pelops, Danaus, and the rest. Most 
of all we hear of the great migration of the Dorians,? somewhere 
about 1000 B.C. It is the habit of Greek tradition to remember 
chiefly the last of a series of events. It remembers the last 
migration, as it collected the last of the lyric poets, the last 
tragedies, the last form of the Epos. And modern research shows 
us that there were many successive waves of migration from the 
north and north-west. 

If we go back to the Stone Age, it seems likely that there was 


1 Thuc. i. 2 φαίνεται ἡ viv ᾿Ελλὰς καλουμένη οὐ πάλαι βεβαίως οἰκουμένη, ἀλλὰ 
μεταναστάσεις τε οὖσαι τὰ πρότερα καὶ ῥᾳδίως ἕκαστοι τὴν ἑαυτῶν ἀπολείποντες, 
βιαζόμενοι ὑπό τινων ἀεὶ πλειόνων----ὰ wonderful description. 

2 Δῶρον = Shand’, as in Hesiod’s δεκάδωρος, Homer’s ἑκκαιδεκάδωρος. The 
Lambda (\) which served as the sign on the Spartan shields is not likely to 
have been originally a letter of the alphabet ; perhaps it was a picture of a 
hand in profile pointing downwards with the thumb sticking out. Some of 
the pictograms for ‘hand’ are like that. I suspect that the Dorians were the 
‘Tribe of the Hand’, and that δῶρον, ‘ gift’, is a thing ‘handed’ or a duona 
mano, and δίδωμι the physical act of ‘ handing’ or ‘ moving the hand’, rather 
than the moral act of ‘granting’, a use which survives in many poetical 
phrases: e.g. Eur. Her. 1402 δίδου δέρῃ σὴν xetpa.—Boisacq connects 
Δωριεὺς with δόρυ, comparing the names Δωρίμαχος, Δωριφάνης and ἀσχέδωρος 
‘a wild boar’ (spear-resister). 


40 THE-RISE OF THE ‘GREEK GRIC Il 


in Greece a very primitive ‘ Hittoid’ or non-Aryan population, 
profoundly influenced at certain centres by the advanced material 
civilization of Crete. On these conditions, probably well before 
2000 B.C., came an immigration of the peoples who afterwards 
became the main Greek stock and who spoke a language that is 
the parent of Greek. They were an Iranian people, akin to the 
ancient Persians: Greek and Old Persian are unique in having 
a Middle Voice and a dual number and in turning initial s into an 
aspirate. They worshipped Zeus, the Aryan Sky-God. They 
came, following their flocks in bullock carts, perhaps by way of 
the Russian steppes, down through Thrace, Macedonia and Thes- 
saly. They taught the inhabitants to speak Greek, and were the 
ancestors of those Aeolians and Ionians who were afterwards 
driven before the various floods of later invasion. For later on 
there came waves of peoples not entirely nameless: a great 
movement of Thraco-Phrygian tribes with eastern linguistic 
affinities, saying sate instead of centum or éxatév—who 
perhaps founded the main civilization of Troy: then the 
Achaeans proper, not very numerous, consisting mainly of 
chieftains and condottieri with their bands of followers from the 
North-West ; and lastly, closely akin to the Achaeans, the North- 
Western race of Dorians in their full mass. 

The above attempt to make some statement on a subject which 
is extremely uncertain may be inexact in almost every detail, but 
it will serve as a hypothesis to work on, and is based on the 
views of considerable authorities, chiefly Professors Burnet 1 and 
J. A. K. Thomson. By the time we approach the borders ot 
Homeric story, we can hazard some few more definite statements 
about these North-Western or ‘Danubian’ immigrants. They 
were of Aryan speech : their language, as we see in the remains 
of the Doric or North-Western dialects, was gradually assimi- 
lated to the Greek that was being already spoken in Middle and 
Southern Greece. It is commonly said, indeed, that the 
Achaeans actually brought the Greek language with them and 
imposed both it and the Epic form upon the natives; but apart 

1 See Burnet’s articles on Pythagoras and Socrates in Ζ. R. E. The 
augment and some points in declension could also be cited as links between 
Greek and Old Persian. The Achaioi perhaps spoke a ‘ Celtic’ language. See 
especially Archaeology in Greece 1919-1921 by A. J. B. Wace in J.H.S. xli. 


This first mixture of Hittoid #/s Proto-Hellenic peoples makes a ‘ Helladic’ 
Age, on which supervenes a Bronze Age invasion from Crete and the south. 


Il THE MIGRATIONS 41 


from other objections to this theory, the Achaeans had nothing 
like enough time for such an achievement. Both the language 
and to some extent the form of Epos must have been in Greece 
already. The invaders seem to have been, to a preponderant 
extent, tall and fair, warlike, uncivilized. Authorities differ about 
the shape of their heads. They too worshipped the typical 
Aryan patriarchal Sky-God.1_ They used, in the later streams 
of invasion at any rate, iron weapons, including the terrible leaf- 
shaped iron sword which was to cut its triumphant way through 
all Europe; they carried round metal shields, and fastened their 
cloaks with ‘fibulae’ or safety pins. The description of the 
Thracians given by Herodotus in his fifth book would probably 
have been true some six centuries earlier of all these invading 
Northerners. Professor Ridgeway, who has helped so greatly 
our understanding of the two elements in early Greek life, has 
unfortunately over-simplified his statement of the case by 
speaking as if there were one homogeneous invading race, 
and one homogeneous race of aboriginals. He operates with 
‘ Achaeans’ from the north, and aboriginal ‘ Pelasgians’. The 
terminology is convenient, but perhaps dangerously convenient 
since neither part of the antithesis is really simple. 


First the Pelasgians. In antiquity the name Pelasgian stood 
broadly for pre-Hellenic. There were two main views, not 
always consciously distinguished. To Herodotus the Pelasgi 
were the aboriginal inhabitants of Greece, pre-Hellenic and 
therefore barbaric, though in course of time they became for the 
most part Hellenized. According to him the Lacedaemonians 


Recent explorations show that Mycenae was unimportant in ‘ Helladic’ times ; 
then came Minoan influences and greatness; then Helladic influence re- 
emerged. The Lion Gate, Cyclopean Walls, and ‘ Treasury of Atreus’ are, 
from this point of view, late. Cf. Wace and Thompson, Prehistoric Thessaly, 
on movements from the south; also Ridgeway, Zur/y Age, p. 645 ff. (which 
however fails to account for the place-names). 

1 See Mr. A. B. Cook’s great book on Zezs, Cambridge 1914. The name 
Zeus at any rate is Aryan, not Hittite. However, the evidence is pretty 
clear that there was a patriarchal Sky-god and Thunder-god in Greece 
before the Achaeans came. Of course every Greek god is an immense 
complex; it is impossible to call one Achaean and another Pelasgian. Zeus 
in classical times has usually dark hair, whatever that is worth as evidence 
(A 128); he is called ‘ Pelasgian’ (II 233; cf. Strabo, p. 329); is identified 
with the Cretan Bull-god and Kouros-god, and has many strange non-Achaean 
attributes. 


42 THE RISHCOF “THE "GREEK WEEIC Π 


were of Hellenic race and immigrant, the Athenians were 
Pelasgians, who had never left their home: though he introduces 
this division by the statement that these two cities were ‘the 
most powerful of the Hellenes’. Thucydides, on the other hand, 
seems to think of Pelasgians as part of the same general stock 
over which Hellén and his sons gradually acquired such power 
that they all adopted the name Hellenes.! If we attempt to 
reach the historical fact that lies beneath this confused language, 
Professor Myres would suggest that the Pelasgians were a real 
set of tribes, with northern rather than Aegean affinities, whom 
we find first in places like Dodona, the Hellespont, and Pelas- 
giotis, then, as they move under pressure from above, in various 
parts of Greece; in Crete, in Argos, in Attica, especially and 
permanently in the islands of Lemnos and Imbros, where two 
inscriptions in a non-Greek language have been discovered, and, 
under the influence of Herodotus, accepted as Pelasgian. As 
a matter of fact it seems clear that one at least of these inscrip- 
tions is Etruscan ; it is even included in the Corpus Iuscriptio- 
num Etruscarum. Shall we then conclude with some of the 
ancients that Pelasgians and Etruscans are the same race? 
Sophocles speaks of ‘Tyrrhenian Pelasgi’, and Herodotus 
remarks that the people of Plakié and Skylaké in the Hellespont 
spoke the same language as those of Cortona in Etruria.2 This 
seems to be a mere confusion. The strange maritime people 
who were called by themselves Rasna, by the Egyptian 
monuments Turscha, by the Greeks Tyrseni, and by the Romans 
Tusci or Etrusci, seem certainly to have reached Western Italy 
from the East of the Aegean, and may well have left several 
settlements on the way. The name Tyrseni is believed to be 
simply ‘tower men’ (from ‘ tyrsis’) and was doubtless applied to 
any band of sea-rovers who built themselves fortified posts in 
Greek waters. And any strange language occurring in that area 
was likely without much inquiry to be called ‘ Pelasgian’. 


1 Hdt. i. 56: Thuc. i. 3. Compare Strabo, v. p. 220 ἀρχαῖόν τι φῦλον κατὰ 
τὴν Ἑλλάδα πᾶσαν ἐπιπολάσαν. He regards them as βάρβαροι (σχεδὸν ἡ σύμπασα 
“Ἑλλὰς κατοικία βαρβάρων ὑπῆρξε τὸ παλαιόν vii. p. 321), but he seems there to 
be thinking of degrees of civilization, not of racial affinities. I doubt if he 
seriously disagreed with the statement of Dionys. Halic. Antigg. Romm. 
i. 17 ἢν καὶ τὸ τῶν Πελασγῶν γένος Ἑλληνικόν, ἐκ Πελοποννήσου τὸ ἀρχαῖον. 

2. Hdt. i. 57, reading Κρότωνα for Κρηστῶνα. 


If THE MIGRATIONS? THE ‘PELASGOIL’ 43 


It may well be that the Pelasgi were a particular tribe specially 
prominent in Greece before the Hellenic period, and it may be 
that historians can discover some of its habitations and wanderings. 
But the great dispersion of the name and the apparent lack of 
connexion between the different peoples called by it lend great 
persuasiveness to a suggestion of Dr. Leaf’s. He compares the 
name ‘ Welsh’, which means ‘ march-men ’ and which was applied 
by the Teutonic tribes to all their neighbours to the west and 
south. Gauls, Britons, Italians, Dacians, were all ‘Welsh’. 
The ‘Walloons’ of Belgium and the ‘ Vlachs’ of the Balkan 
peninsula are the same. They are the strange peoples just 
beyond the Teutonic border. If Pelasgoi is connected with 
πέλας, ‘near’, the word would mean ‘ neighbour’ and would 
denote the nearest strange people to the invading Greeks, as 
their shifting border moved down from the north-west." 

Thus it would seem on analysis that either ‘ Pelasgoi’ isa name 
like ‘ Welsh’, meaning the next people beyond the border, or 
else it originally denoted a particular tribe, which for some reason 
ended by giving its name as a general term to denote the whole 
population of pre-Achaean Greece. 

This is a perfectly normal phenomenon in the history of race 
names. The tribe whose name spreads need not even be the 
most important: it need only be the most conspicuous as seen 
from over the border. Both Wessex and Mercia were bigger 
than the kingdom of the Angles, and England was unified under 
the headship of Wessex ; but Europe generally called the whole 
country after the Angles, because the Angles were nearest to 
Europe. All Europeans to the Saracens used to be ‘ Franks’ ; 
all Greeks to the Asiatics were ‘sons of Yawan’; just as in Italy 
they were ‘ Graeci’ from the name of a certain Epirot tribe which 
was much in touch with South Italy; in Greece itself they were 
‘ Hellenes’ from the name of a dominant tribe in South Thessaly. 
It is safe to use Pelasgian in the two senses if we carefully avoid 
confusing them. 


1 See Leaf, 770}, chapter vii, esp. pp. 332 ff. Also Skutsch in Pauly- 
Wissowa on Etrusker. Soph. fr. 270 (Pearson).—On the Pelasgians as a 
historical tribe, see Myres in /. 1. S. xxvii, who traces the ancient ‘ Pelasgian 
theory’ to Ephorus. Pelasgians are mentioned at Dodona, II 233 (apparent- 
ly), Hes. fr. 225 (K), and Hdt.: Pelasgiotis, B 681 ff. (apparently), and later 
writers: Hellespont, see Myres on B &4off.: Hdt. i. 57, ii. 51. Lemnos in 
Homer (A 594, θ 294) is occupied by Hephaistos’ people, the Sinties. 


44 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC 1 


The little that we can make out about the race affinities of the 
real aborigines is based chiefly on the names of the places which 
they inhabited. All over Greece we find the towns, mountains, 
rivers, and, curiously enough, the flowers, called by non-Greek 
names. Names like Larisa, Corinthos, Zakynthos, Hyakinthos, 
Olympos, Arisbe, Narkissos, Parnassos, Halicarnassos, are no 
more Greek than Connecticut and Poughkeepsie or Alabama are 
English, or Morbihan and Landes are French. And an examina- 
tion of these non-Greek place-names, as carried out with great 
ability by Kretschmer and Fick, leads to a result which is on 
general grounds satisfactory. There is a great system of place- 
names in a language still unknown to us, which reaches across 
the mainland of Greece, the islands of the Aegean, and practically 
the whole immense peninsula of Asia Minor: a language which 
is clearly not Semitic, and in the opinion of most scholars not 
Aryan either, and which must therefore have belonged to that 
pre-Semitic population of Asia Minor of which the most 
distinguished group is the Hittite Anthropologists and 


1 Especially Fick, Vorgriechische Ortsnamen (1905) and Hattiden und 
Danubier in Griechenland (1908), illuminating books: also Kretschmer, 
Geschichte der Griechischen Sprache (1896). Conway, however, argues that 
this language—quite distinct from Etruscan-Pelasgian—was Indo-European, 
though of course not Greek. (B.S. A., viii. pp. 125 ff, x. pp. 115 ff.) He 
starts from the three short inscriptions found at Praesus, a town said to be 
‘Eteocretan’, in the east of the island. They are comparatively late, saec. 
vi to iv, in Greek letters, but in an unknown language which bears affinities 
to Venetic and Osco-Umbrian. Conway takes this language as = Eteocretan 
and Eteocretan as = Minoan. For an historical criticism of this view see 
Burrows, Cveée, pp. 151 ff. 

It is rash to decide till we know more of the Hittite language, which may 
now soon occur. H. Winckler’s excavations during 1906 and after at 
Boghaz-Koi in Cappadocia have resulted in: (1) a proof that Boghaz-Koi 
was the capital of the Hittite kingdom ; (2) the discovery of the state archives, 
consisting of many large complete tablets and over 2,000 fragmentary ones— 
correspondence from Hittite vassals and from Egypt. The earliest are of the 
same date as the Tel-el-Amarna letters, and contain notes for the Assyro- 
Babylonian version of the treaty between Rameses II and the Hittite king, 
Chetaser. The Hittite language is written both in hieroglyphics and in 
cuneiform. The hieroglyphs are different from those of Egypt and have not 
proved easy to decipher, though they were first noticed in 1736 and a corpus 
of them was published in Wright’s Empire of the Hittites in 1886. (See 
Campbell-Thompson, 4 New Decipherment of the Hittite Hieroglyphics, 
Oxford, 1913.) The cuneiform documents consist chiefly of some 20,000 
tablets found by Winckler at Boghaz-Koi written in various languages, includ- 
ing Semitic Babylonian, Sumerian, and Hittite proper. See Die Sprache 
der Hittiter by Friedrich Hrozny, Leipzig, 1917. (Hrozny carried on 
Winckler’s work after the latter’s lamented death.) Also Caractére Indo- 
Européen dela Langue Hittite, by Carl Marstrander, Christiania, 1918, with 


II THE MIGRATIONS: THE ‘ ACHAIOI’ 45 


measurers of skulls tell us that there were in the Aegean lands 
before any Northerners arrived on the scene two distinct races— 
a dark long-headed Aegean race with littoral habits, never 
going far from the sea; and another dark short-skulled 
Armenoid race, inhabiting the highlands on both sides. How 
far these races were conscious of their respective unities, how 
far the ruling Minoans were racially distinct from the surround- 
ing peoples, are questions which we need not at present face. 
The Aegean world was certainly divided into many little tribes 
and communities, which no doubt fought and hated one another 
as gladly as so many Celtic clans. But the remains show that, 
generally speaking, they were homogeneous in culture though 
by no means all at the same level. And we shall, with this 
apology, speak of them in future under one name as pre-Hellenic 
or Aegean.! 


And opposed to these aboriginal or quasi-aboriginal races 
stand the invaders from the north, Professor Ridgeway’s 
‘Achaeans’, The case is exactly similar, The Achaeans 
formed one of the many immigrant tribes; but the name spread 
beyond the bounds of the tribe and was used by the Aegean 
peoples to denote the northern races in general. In Homer it 
seems to include all the warriors, of whatever blood, who have 
fallen under the lead of the northern chieftains. But we should 
not forget that there were many branches of the invasion, From 


review by Campbell-Thompson in the 77mes Literary Supplement, October 23, 
1919. It appears that Hittite has (1) noun case endings, (2) possessive 
pronouns, and (3) some verbal inflections of markedly Indo-European 
character and indeed very like Greek. (The suffixed pronouns were: Sing. 
1. -2, -7)114, -m; 2.-t; 3.-5. Pl. 1. -va; 2.-ut; 3. τς, The verbs showed 
an augmented past tense, e.g. a-da-7, ‘he gave’; a-k-¢, ‘he came’. The 
nouns have accus. sing. in -7, and, as Prof. Sayce pointed out, nom. in -s, 
Prepositions are ad(a), ἔα, mit, -kan. Times, Nov. 22, 1912, reporting a 
lecture by Campbell-Thompson.) The vocabulary, however, is difficult to 
equate with Indo-European, and Dr. Cowley and Mr. Campbell-Thompson 
consider the affinity of Hittite not yet proven. See Hogarth’s article 
HITTITES in Lxcycl. Brit, xi; also the note in O. Weber, Die Literatur der 
Babylonier und Assyrier (Erganzungsband ii of Der Alte Orient), p. 275, 
and Garstang’s Land of the Hittites (1910); and especially A. E. Cowley, 
The Hittites, 1920. 

1 The question of Semitic and Egyptian influence or settlement among 
these aborigines can be left aside. There was much interplay between Egypt 
and Minoan Crete, but no whole nation came in from the south or east as 
there did from the north. 


46 THE RISE OF THE GREEK 2ELIC II 


the forests of Central Europe, guided by the valleys and moun- 
tain passes towards Dodona and towards Thessaly, came divers 
Achaeans and Hellenes; more to the east came tribes of the 
same blood, afterwards called Macedonian and Thracian.! One 
of these Thracian tribes, the Bhryges, crossed into Asia, like the 
Cimmerii and the Gauls after them, and drove a wedge of 
northern population into the midst of the native ‘ Hittoids’. If 
any one is inclined to over-simplify his conception of these racial 
movements, he might find a useful warning in a study of Phrygia, 
or of one part of Phrygia, the Troad. If we take the various in- 
vaders of the Troad in carly Greek times, we find first the 
‘Phryges’ or ‘Bryges’: their name seems to have kept the old 
Indo-Germanic 64 which the Greeks could not pronounce. Also 
the Troes or Trojans; also a branch of the Paiones, who gave 
their name to a part of Northern Macedonia; further, some 
northern neighbours of the Paiones, the Dardanoi, led by a royal 
tribe called Aeneadae; some of their southern neighbours, the 
Mygdones; a tribe which disappeared early, called Phorkyntes 
or Berekyntes; some Thracians, not further specified, from the 
Chersonese; and lastly the Trares. Those are the northern 
invaders only. The races already settled in the land seem to 
have included a main body of Leleges, a race generally known 
as aboriginal further south, in Caria; some Pelasgi, who had 
probably come from Thrace ; Gergithes and Teucri, the latter 
being perhaps a royal tribe; and, if we are to believe the Zzad, 
important settlements of Lycians and Kilikes. And how many 
other tribes may there have been, whose names are not preserved 
to us? That is the sort of complex of races which existed in one 
small piece of territory. 

And meantime, further to the west of Greece, came the pres- 
sure of other and more barbarous peoples, called by the general 
name of Illyrians, who eventually occupied the regions of Albania 
and Epirus, and resisted Greek civilization till long after classical 
times. 

But, to get rid of these names and come closer to reality, what 

1. O. Hoffmann, Die Makedonen, thre Sprache und ihr Volksthum (1906), 
confirms Kretschmer’s results. The language is a dialect of Greek, akin to 
Thessalian, but influenced by ‘non-Greek’ Phrygo-Thracian and Illyrian. 


The chief mark is, of course, Mac. 8 y ὃ for Greek ᾧ y 6. The eastern wing 
of the Migrations seems to have been the earlier, 


II PROCESSES OF MIGRATION 47 


are we to conceive these invasions to have been like? Very 
different, I think, in different circumstances. It is almost a rule 
in history, that before any definite invasion of a new territory 
there is a long period of peaceful penetration. The whole pro- 
cess of the northern migrations must cover a period of many 
centuries. In the beginnings it is not an army that comes to 
invade. It is some adventurers or traders who come and settle: 
sOme mercenaries who are invited in. Or again, it is a few 
families who move a little further up a mountain, or a little on 
the other side of a pass, breaking up new land where it happens 
to be unoccupied. For a great part of the process, on the main- 
land at least, these may have been the normal modes of advance: 
on the one hand, a gradual increase of northern soldiers and 
northern officers in the armies of the Aegean powers; on the 
other, a slight change in the possession of farms and pasture 
grounds, in which the stronger race steadily got more and the 
weaker less. But violence certainly came in, and in the later 
stages the very extreme of violence. While there was room for 
both races there was perhaps little or no fighting. But a time 
always came when there was no room. Of that later. 

One thing seems clear. While the great masses of the various — 
northern peoples were steadily pushing downwards on the main- 
land, small bodies of chiefs or adventurers seem to have gone 
forth into the Aegean region to carve out for themselves little 
empires or lives of romance. They were ‘invited in’, as Thucy- 
dides puts it (i. 3), as allies or mercenaries or condotizer7 in the 
various cities. And, like other condottiert, they had a way of 
marrying native princesses and occupying vacant thrones.’ It is 
just what the Normans did in their time. About the year 1035 
Robert Guiscard set out from Normandy, so Gibbon tells us, as 
a pilgrim, with only one companion. He went south, and ended 
by becoming King of Calabria. ‘Under his command the 
peasants of Calabria assumed the character and the name of 
Normans.’ Just so Agamemnon’s followers assumed the charac- 


’ As we shall see later, there is ground for suspecting that descent in these 
communities went by the female side, so that to marry the queen or princess 
was the normal way of becoming a king. So Xuthus = Creusa, Oedipus = 
Jocasta, Pelops=Hippodameia, Menelaus and Agamemnon=the daughters 
of the native king Tyndareus, &c. Cf. the numerous instances in Frazer, 
Kingship, chap. viii. (Also Leaf, Homer and History, cap. ii.) 


48 THE RISE OF THE GREEK-EPIC II 


ter and the name of Achaeans.' In the eleventh and twelfth 
centuries A.D. you could find little bands of the Northmen 
established at various points of the Mediterranean, as kings and 
nobles among an inferior population. ‘The gradual association, 
incorporation, or alliance of the Scandinavians with the nations 
they came to plunder or destroy is perhaps the most decisive 
fact in the story of the Christian Middle Ages, and affords a 
basis or starting-point for every subsequent development.’ So 
writes Professor Beazley of the mediaeval Normans.? And just 
the same might be said of these other invading Northmen in 
Greece in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries before the 
Christian era. 

The great citadel of Troy had a northern king, a Phrygian. 
Similarly in all the other centres of Aegean power we seem to 
find Northmen ruling. Minos indeed was aboriginal, and even 
divine: but the tradition makes him first into a ‘ friend’, then 
into a son, of the Achaean Zeus*; and Idomeneus, the Cretan 
chief of the //ad, is clearly counted among the Achaeans. The 
ships of the ‘ peoples of the sea’ are under the Achaean Aga- 
memnon. He is the very type and king of the Achaeans: but 
it is interesting to notice that his family tree is derived from 
Phrygia.* If this is right, Agamemnon belonged to those same 
Northmen who had come eastward by way of Thrace to occupy 


1 Gibbon, cap. lvi. There is a good account of these sons of Tancred in 
Demolins, Comment la Route crée le Type Social, ii. pp. 313 ff. Just so with 
the Dorians: Halicarnassus was founded by ‘ Ionians from Trozén’ with 
Dorian leaders. It counts as Dorian. Hdt. vii. 99: Strabo, p. 653, ἅς. 
So, too, Tarentum: Τάραντα δὲ ἀπῴκισαν μὲν Λακεδαιμόνιοι (Perioikoi and 
Parthenioi)* οἰκιστὴς δὲ ἐγένετο Σπαρτιάτης Φάλανθος, Paus. x. 10. 3. The 
dialect is Achaean = Perioikian, but the colony is called ‘Dorian’. So 
the ‘Spartan’ army at Thermopylae, 300 Spartans in 5,000 odd, besides 
Helots. Meister, Dorer und Achder, p. 22 ff. 

2 Dawn of Modern Geography, pt. ii, chap. i. 5 See above, p. 30. 

4 Pelops is nearly always a Phrygian (Soph. Ajax, 1292; Hat. vii. 8 and 
11; Bacchylides, vil. 53, &c.). Pindar says a Lydian (QV. i. 24, ix. 9). After- 
wards the ideas are confused, and he is merely Asiatic. (So Thuc. i. 9.) 
Observe that his alleged ancestor, Tantalus, was not originally a son of Zeus, 
butan ὀαριστής like Minos; i.e. not an Achaean, but a native prince, and 
Agamemnon’s descent from him a fiction (Eur. Ov. 11; Pind. Οἱ i. 43, &c.). 
Tantalus also appears as the first husband of Clytemnestra, slain by 
Agamemnon (Eur. 22}. Au/. 1150). His being non-Achaean may perhaps 
explain why Zeus sends him to Tartaros with Sisyphus, Salmoneus, Tityos, 
Ixion. (See J. E. Harrison, Prolegomena, pp. 336 ff.) Pelops’ ally and 
victim, the charioteer Myrtilus, bears the name of the Hittite king, Mursil, 
who was also a charioteer. Strange! 


I THE NORTHMEN AS RULERS 49 


Troy: and when he led an army against Priam he fought in a 
specially close sense against his own kindred. 

The later Greek imagination liked to think of Troy as an 
Asiatic city, and to make the Trojan War a type of the age-long 
struggle of West and East, Aryan and Semite. There are abun- 
dant symptoms of this tendency in the //ad (e.g. ᾧ 88, X 48). 
But it seems likely that in the earliest records the Trojan chiefs 
were of the same race as the Achaeans. There is no difference 
of language. The difference of language comes in between the 
Trojans and their own allies, the ‘ Carians with barbarous tongue’ 
and the various peoples in whom ‘there was not one language 
nor one voice’.! Their mode of fighting is exactly the same as 
that of the Achaeans. Their gods are the same. Nay, if we 
examine carefully into that question the result is rather curious. 
According to Homer, a typical Achaean oath is by the trinity, 
Zeus, Apollo, and Athena.? And this trinity in the Homeric 
poems must have been originally on the side of Troy! Apollo 
fights openly for the Trojans. Zeus is constantly protecting 
them, putting off their evil day, and rebuking their enemies. 
Athena indeed appears in our present //ad as the enemy of 
Troy. Yet it is to her that the Trojans especially pray. She 
is the patroness of their city, she the regular Achaean ‘ City- 
holder’: and it is when the Palladion, or image of the protect- 
ing Athena, is stolen away, that Troy eventually can be taken. 
In Euripides’ 77ajax Women, one may add, the treachery of 
Athena in turning against her own city is one of the main notes 
of the drama. 


? B 867, Δ 437. 

2 The trinity does not occur outside Homer. (‘Originally a trinity of 
Father-Consort-Son, as usual in Aegean religion? Cf. births of Hephaistos, 
Erechtheus &c.’ JAKT.) On Zeus see note on p. 41. Athena is on one side 
merely the Afthenaia koré (see p. 97), on another, as Pallas, she is the 
palladion, or divine thunder-shield which falls from heaven ; as such she is 
a ‘daughter’, almost a mere attribute, of the Thunderer. Apollo has some 
aboriginal characteristics, e.g. he is a stranger to the other Olympians, who 
fly before him, in the Homeric hymn ; but as Sun-god (I have lived to see 
this old view, which is based on firm ancient authority, re-emerge from the 
depths of unfashionableness) he is ciosely associated with the Sky-god, Zeus. 
See J. E. Harrison, Prolegomena, p. 461 f.; Wilamowitz, ‘ Apollo’ (Oxford, 
1908) ; and in Hermes, 1903, p. 575. Also Th. Reinach, /tanos et ’inventio 
scutt, Rev. de Uhistoire des religions, 1909, p. 331. The parallel between the 
patriarchal Zeus in Greece and Othin in Scandinavia is very striking : invading 
gods accepted as supreme by the native populations and imperfectly assimi- 
lated to the old system of gods. See Chadwick, Cu/t of Othin. 

2760 E 


50 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC II 


One great city, as we saw above, did not accept Achaean 
rulers. In Thebes the Cadmeans, whoever they may have been, 
held out to the end. The war of The Seven has a different look 
from the ordinary wars of one Achaean band against another. 
The Minyai in Orchomenos were destroyed more easily. ‘Thebes 
seems to have remained like an island in the flood of Achaean 
invaders. She had them to the north of her in Thessaly and 
Phthia, to the west in Phocis and Aetolia, to the east (probably) 
in Euboea, to the south-west in Argos. And, if we are to 
believe tradition, it was from this farthest southern point that 
they turned, determined to tolerate no more the great fortress of 
the alien race. 

But in the main, if we try to conceive the Aegean in, say, the 
thirteenth century B.C., we must think of the ancient seats of 
power as generally standing, but at each palace a northern chief 
established as king with a band of northern followers about him. 
Their power was based partly on sheer plunder, partly on the 
taxes yielded by a constantly decreasing trade. It was an un- 
stable condition. Some northern Agamemnon might sit at 
Mycenae, a northern Idomeneus at Cnossos. They might have 
imbibed a fair amount of civilization. They were perhaps good 
rulers. No one could doubt their valour. But too many of their 
own kinsmen were prowling the adjacent world. It was only by 
memory that they knew the 


Riches that Ilion held, the walléd and beautiful city, 
Of old in the passing of peace, ere came the sons of Achaia. 


Fewer and fewer caravans of laden mules plodded up the stone 
ways of the Argive mountains. Fewer and fewer fleets of trad- 
ing boats came to pay toll in the harbours of Southern Crete. 


In this state of weak equilibrium there came further shocks 
from the north-west. Other tribes pressed down on the main- 
land, through Thessaly down to Aetolia, over from Aetolia to 
Boeotia, to the north of the Peloponnese, to Elis: by sea came 
the most dangerous of all enemies, hordes of dispossessed men, 
who must plunder and slay, or else die. It was possibly with 
some view of saving his dynasty and consolidating the various 
bodies of chiefs who would otherwise be troubling him that 


II ‘SACKERS OF CITIES’ 51 


the Agamemnon of the time gathered his expedition of ‘all 
Achaeans’ against Troy, and won—if he did win it—his more 
than Pyrrhic victory. Troy indeed fell, but all Achaean Greece 
fell with it. A storm, says the tradition, scattered the returning 
kings over the face of the deep. Some came home to die, some 
were lost, some settled in strange lands. But for certain their 
glory was gone, their palaces shaken, and the names of their 
sons are blotted out from the page of history. Those old sea- 
rovers had among them a special title of honour, πτολίπορθος, 
‘Sacker of Cities’. It represented the height of romantic glory 
as well as the most profitable of financial coups. And the same 
idea, seen from the other side, haunted also the imagination of 
the civilized city-dwellers. A beleaguered city, with the men 
fighting in front and the women and old men watching from the 
wall, forms a regular subject of epic description. It is depicted, 
for example, on the shields of Achilles in Homer and of Heracles 
in Hesiod. The same theme appears on a silver vessel from 
Mycenae and on reliefs and mosaics from Minoan Cnossus,} 
The theme took epic shape afterwards in the tales of Thebes 
and Troy. It was in these ages the crowning triumph or the 
ultimate horror of human life. 

At first when the rovers sacked a city, they could in a way 
rebuild it or have it rebuilt. They assimilated enough of 
Aegean civilization at least to live in the castles of those whom 
they conquered. But the same thing occurred here as in Rome 
afterwards. As the ruder hordes and the vaster numbers pressed 
down; as the pre-Achaean races had sunk in numbers and in 
confidence ; there came at last tribes who could destroy but 
not build nor even keep, ‘ sackers-of-cities’ who burned and 
shattered, and then could make no more of their conquest than 
to live huddled in war-parties among the ruins. 

One must probably conceive two different processes of migra- 
tion, by land and by sea respectively. By land, a whole tribe 
or nation tended to push on, carrying with it its women, its 
normal possessions, its flocks and herds. Though even on land 
there were many varieties in the intensity of the struggle. In 
Boeotia, for instance, the conquering race, pushing over from the 

1 Cf. Iliad = 509, Aspis 239 ff. Evans, Cretan Palaces, i. p. 314. The 
mosaic is Middle Minoan II. 

E 2 


52 THE RISE (OF THE GREEK’ EPIC Π 


west, seems to have settled without much massacre and without 
any formal enslavement of the resident population. One result 
of this comparative clemency was a subsequent harshness. The 
oligarchies in Boeotia continued through several centuries 
peculiarly severe and illiberal. The subject race had been 
admitted to something so nearly approaching equality, that it 
needed—in the judgement of its masters—continual thrashing. 
In most of Thessaly, in Argos, Corinth, Sparta, the natives were 
reduced to varying degrees of slavery. They became, like the 
Gibeonites, hewers of wood and drawers of water: like the 
Messenians,' they ‘walked as asses walk, weighed down with 
heavy burdens’. In Attica the invaders seem to have been few 
and weak. They merely merged with the old population. One 
cannot even discern a definite ruling class. It is a fact worth 
noting by those who study questions of race, that among both 
the Greeks and the Hebrews the most prominent and charac- 
teristic part of the nation was also the part most largely mixed 
with the race of the despised aborigines. The tribe of Judah 
had the largest Canaanite element.? As for the Athenians, they 
always claim to be children of the soil, and Herodotus actually 
goes so far as to describe them as ‘ not Greek but Pelasgian ’. 


But what of the migrations by sea? The centre of Greece is 
really not Athens nor Sparta nor any state of the mainland. The 
real centre is the Aegean; and the migrations by sea are both 
more characteristic and for after-history, I venture to suggest, 
more important. When a tribe moved by land it took most of its 
belongings with it. When it had to cross the sea a possession 
must needs be very precious indeed before it could be allowed 
room in those small boats. Of course there are cases where a 
deliberate invasion is planned, as the Saxons, for instance, 
planned their invasion of Britain. The fighting men go first and 
secure a foothold; the rest of the nation can follow when things 
are safe. In historical times, when the Athenians left Attica 
before the advance of the Persian army, they took their wives and 
even their herds across the narrow waters to Salamis and Aegina, 
When the Phocaeans deserted their city and fled to the west, they 


1 Tyrtaeus 6. 
? See e.g. Driver on Gen. xxxviii; Cheyne also remarks on Edomite and 
North Arabian elements in Judah, Z7c. Biol. s. v. 


II BY LAND AND BY SEA 53 


seem to have begun by taking their womankind at least as far as 
Chios, where they might hope to find a breathing-place.' But 
these were more organized or at least less helpless peoples; the 
movement was well thought out beforehand, and there was friendly 
land near. In the earlier migrations of the Dark Age a tribe, or 
mass of people, seldom took to the sea till driven by the fear of 
death. That was no time to think of taking women or herds. You 
might desire greatly to take your young wife—or your old wife, for 
that matter ; but you would scarcely dare to make such a proposal 
to the hungry fighters about you. You might wish to take your 
little boy. But would the rest of us, think you, choose to be en- 
cumbered with another consumer of bread who could never help 
in a fight, who might delay us in charging or flying, might cry 
from the pain of hunger or fatigue and betray us all? No, leave 
him on the beach, and come! Putsomemarkonhim. Probably 
some one will make him a slave, and then, with good luck, you 
may some day knock up against him and pay his ransom. 

When we are off on the sea, what is the prospect before us? 
We have some provisions, though no water. Instead, we take 
guides who know where there are springs near the sea-shore in 
divers islands and unfrequented promontories. We can move by 
night and hide in caves during the day. The guide probably 
knows places where cattle may, with some risk, be raided. Better 
still, he knows of some villages that have been lately attacked by 
other pirates, where the men are still weak with their wounds. 
Not all their flocks have been killed. We might well take the 
rest. If we stay at sea, we die of thirst. If we are seen landing, 
we are for certain massacred by any human beings who find us. 
Piracy on the high seas will not keep us alive. In the good old 
days, when the Northmen first came, pirates could live like 
fighting-cocks and be buried like princes. But the business has 
been spoiled. There are too many men like ourselves, and too 
few ships with anything on them tosteal. If we go back to our 
old home, the invaders have by this time got our women as slaves, 
and will either kill us or sell us in foreign countries. Is there 
anywhere an island to seize? There are many little desert rocks 
all studded over the Aegean, where doubtless we have rested 


1 Hdt. i. 165. Cf. the career of Dionysius of Phocaea as a pirate, vi. 17; 
of the Samians, vi. 22 ff. And in general Thuc. I, 5. 


54 THE RISEYOF THE 'GREEKSEPIC II 


often enough when the constrained position of sitting everlastingly 
at the oars has been too much for us; rested and starved, and some 
of us gone mad with thirst under that hot sun. <A waterless rock 
will be no use. Can we seize some inhabited island? Alone we 
are too weak; but what if we combined with some other outlaws ? 
There are some outcast Carians in like plight with ourselves in 
one of the desert caves near. In our normal life we would not 
touch a Carian. Their weapons are no gentleman’s weapons. 
Their voices make one sick. And their hair ...! But what does 
it matter now?... And with them are some Leleges, who worship 
birds ; some unknown savages from the eastern side, dark-bearded 
hook-nosed creatures answering to babyish names like ‘ Atta’ and 
‘Babba’ and ‘ Duda’; and—good omen !—some of our old enemies 
from near home, the tribe that we were always fighting with and 
had learned to hate in our cradles. A pleasure to meet them 
again! One can understand their speech. We swear an oath 
that makes us brothers. We cut one another's arms, pour the 
blood into a bowl and drink some all round. We swear by our 
gods: to make things pleasanter, we swear by one another’s gods, 
so far as we can make out their outlandish names. And then 
forth to attack our island. 

After due fighting it is ours. The men who held it yesterday 
are slain. Some few have got away in boats, and may some day 
come back to worry us; but not just yet, not for a good long 
time. ‘There is water to drink; there is bread and curded milk 
and onions. There is flesh of sheep or goats. There is wine, 
or, at the worst, some coarser liquor of honey or grain, which 
will at least intoxicate. One needs that, after such a day.... No 
more thirst, no more hunger, no more of the cramped galley 
benches, no more terror of the changes of wind and sea. The 
dead men are lying all about us. We will fling them into the 
sea to-morrow. The women are suitably tied up and guarded. 
The old one who kept shrieking curses has been spiked with a 
lance and tossed over the cliff. The wailing and sobbing of the 
rest will stop in a day or two: if it torments you, you can easily 
move a few paces away out of the sound. If it still rings in your 
ears, drink two more cups and you will not mind it. The stars 
are above us, and the protecting sea round us, we have got water 
and food and roofs over our heads. And we wrought it all by 


II SEIZING AN ISLAND 55 


our own wisdom and courage and the manifest help of Zeus and 
Apollo. What good men we are, and valiant and pious; and 
our gods—what short work they make of other men’s gods! 


There is no trait in the above suggestion that is not drawn from 
arealcase. I have been imagining the case of a quite small island. 
More often not a whole island was at stake, but only a promontory 
or a foothold. Nor do we, of course, ever hear the whole compli- 
cations of aconquest. It is always simplified in the tradition. 

In Chios, for instance, we hear that there were first Carians, to 
whom a settlement of Abantes from Euboea had joined themselves. 
Then came an invasion of refugees from Crete—surely not of 
pure Cretan blood—who gradually grew and mostly drove out 
the Carians and Abantes. From Strabo! we hear, significantly 
enough, of a quite different founder of Chios, a man called 
Egertios, who brought with him ‘a mixed multitude’ (σύμμεικτον 
πλῆθος). It afterwards counted as one of the chief Ionian 
cities. In Erythrae there are Cretans, Lycians, and that mixed 
Graeco-barbaric race called Pamphylians, whose dialect seems‘to 
show that they spring from some settlement of old prae-Achaean 
vikings.? Later came new immigrations from all the Ionian cities. 
It was rather different at Colophon and Ephesus on the mainland. 
In both cases there was an ancient pre-Hellenic oracle or temple 
in the neighbourhood. In Colophon there were Greeks from 
Crete, from Boeotia, from the west of the Peloponnese: if we 
may believe the epic tradition, there were fragments of many 
other tribes as well. They forced a settlement somehow on the 
land ; living perhaps, as Wilamowitz suggests, in ‘ Blockhuts’ on 
the shore, fighting for a permanent foothold in the barbarian city. 
In Colophon they are accepted as a ruling caste, and get possession 
even of the oracle. In Ephesus they are weaker; they have a 
position rather as clients of the great temple, and‘ Diana of the 
Ephesians’ remains at heart barbaric till she can break out into 
confessed monstrosity in the Roman period. Round another 
sanctuary, the little rock of Delos, there grows up a peculiar 

1 xiv. p. 633. The main sources for these colonization traditions, outside 
the epos, are Strabo and Paus. vii. 

* The half-barbarous Pamphylian dialect has enough points in common 


with Cypro-Arcadian to show this. See Thumb, Handbuch d. Gr. Dialekte, 
p. 298, and Meillet in Rev. d. Etudes Grecques for 1909, pp. 413 ff. 


56 THE RISE, OF ΤῊΝ GREBKEPIC II 


federation of people from divers parts of the Aegean, a league 
whose business it is to meet at Delos for certain festivals, to pay 
proper dues to the holy place and to keep it sacred. They were 
called ‘Iawones ’, Idnes, and the name spread gradually to a large 
part of the Greek people. 

Nearly everywhere on the mainland and in the isles there are, 
as we have said, old place-names in a language not Greek, but 
earlier thanGreek. But there are exceptions. In Cos we know 
of an invasion from Crete. And there all the place-names are 
Greek. What does that mean? Is it that in this particular 
island, large and fertile as it is, if the Greek invaders wanted to 
ask the name of a mountain or a river, there was no single native 
voice—not even a woman spared for a concubine—to answer 
them, so that they had to name all the places anew? I see no 
other plausible explanation. Different was the end in Lemnos. 
If tradition is to be believed—and, in the one large point where 
it can be tested, the tradition is confirmed by history—there was 
once done in Lemnos that act of vengeance for which one’s 
unregenerate instinct thirsts in thinking over the bloody and 
relentless tale of these conquests. The men of Lemnos were 
duly slain. The women were duly enslaved as concubines. 
But they were trusted too soon: either they nursed the memory 
of their wrongs longer than other women, or in some way they 
had an opportunity denied to others. At any rate the native 
women rose and murdered their invaders, and the island was 
never completely possessed by the Greeks during all the classical 
period. It was a hard task for an island in that position to keep 
itself un-Hellenized. But somehow Pelasgians gathered there. 
Later on, when a part of the population showed some tincture 
of Greek manners and claimed descent from the Argonauts, it 
was expelled. When the children born of some captured Greek 
women began to show their Greek blood, they were murdered 
and their mothers with them. The ‘deeds of Lemnos’ ring with 

1 For all this paragraph see Wilamowitz’s illuminating lecture Dée Jondsche 
Wanderung (Sitzungsber. Berlin. Akad. 1906, iv). As to Ephesus, the 
‘multimammia’ form of Artemis is of course barbaric, and belongs to the 
regular Anatolian mother-goddess. It is most remarkable that the recent 
excavations at Ephesus have unearthed nearly fifty figurines of the goddess, 
‘ranging from the eighth to the fourth centuries B.C.,’ in none of which 


is there ‘any‘approximation to the “ multimammia ” type rendered familiar 
by statuettes of the Roman period ’.—Hogarth, in the 77mes of Nov. 2, 1906. 


PD 


THE DARK AGE 57 


af ominous sound in early Greek proverb, the extreme of horror, 
no other deed like them.! 

This is the sort of picture that we can recover of the so-called 
Dark Age. It is just the stage of society which Professor 
Chadwick has shown to be in so many regions of the world 
the Mother of Heroic Poetry. It was the climax of a long 
process of ‘barbarian invasion’, in which a young half-savage 
race gradually entered into the stored riches of an ancient 
civilization, becoming successively awe-struck visitors, servants, 
enemies, mercenary chieftains, adventurers, plunderers, and 
masters. It was a time, as Diodorus says, of ‘constant war- 
paths and uprootings of peoples’*; a chaos in which an old 
civilization is shattered into fragments, its laws set at naught, and 
that intricate web of normal expectation which forms the very 
essence of human society torn so often and so utterly by continued 
disappointment that at last there ceases to be any normal 
expectation at all. For the fugitive settlers on the shores that 
were afterwards Ionia, and for parts too of Doris and Aeolis, 
there were no tribal gods or tribal obligations left, because there 
were no tribes. There were no old laws, because there was no 
one to administer or even to remember them: only such com- 
pulsions as the strongest power of the moment chose to enforce. 
Household and family life had disappeared, and all its innumer- 
able ties with it. A man was now not living with a wife of his 
own race, but with a dangerous strange woman, of alien language 

1 Aesch. Cho. 631, Hdt. vi. 138. The story fits in with known historical 
facts ; yet perhaps it is not safe to trust it. It has too much the look of a 
myth built upon a religious cult of some kind. First the women of Lemnos 
kill the men; then the men kill the women (and children) ; thirdly, when 
the Minyans of Lemnos are in prison in Sparta, their wives change clothes 
with them and save them (Hdt. iv. 146). 

3 The Heroic Age, Cambridge, 1912. Professor Chadwick discusses six 
societies which have produced Heroic Poetry, and decides that in five of 
them at least (p. 459) ‘The Heroic Age can be traced back to a similar series 
of causes. Firstly, we find a long period of ‘‘education”, in which a semi- 
civilized people has been profoundly affected from without by the influence ot 
a civilized people. Then a time has come in which the semi-civilized people 
has attained a dominant position and possessed itself, at least to some extent, 
of its neighbour’s property.’ Such an age isa ‘ crowded hour of glorious life’, 
when tribal and religious sanctions are broken down, and the individual tries 


his fortune with his sword and his ἀρετή, a time of ‘Mars and the Muses’. 
See Preface, p. v. 
5. Πυκναὶ στρατεῖαι καὶ μεταναστάσεις. Cf. of course all through this discus- 


sion the ‘ Archaeologia’ of Thucydides i. Also see Appendix C, on the List 
of Thalassocrats. 


58 THE RISE OF THE "GREEK Wrlc II 


and alien gods, a woman whose husband or father he had perhaps 
murdered—or, at best, whom he had bought as a slave from the 
murderer. The old Aryan husbandman, as we shall see hereafter, 
had lived with his herds in a sort of familiar connexion. He 
slew ‘ his brother the ox’ only under special stress or for definite 
religious reasons, and he expected his women to shriek when the 
slaying was performed. But now he had left his own herds far 
away. They had been devoured by enemies. And he lived on 
the beasts of strangers whom he robbed or held in servitude. 
He had left the graves of his fathers, the kindly ghosts of his own 
blood, who took food from his hand and loved him. He was 
surrounded by the graves of alien dead, strange ghosts whose 
names he knew not and who were beyond his power to control, 
whom with fear and aversion he tried his best to placate. One 
only concrete thing existed for him to make henceforth the centre 
of his allegiance, to supply the place of his old family hearth, his 
gods, his tribal customs and sanctities. It was a circuit wall of 
stones, a Polzs!; the wall which he and his fellows, men of 
diverse tongues and worships united by a tremendous need, had 
built up to be the one barrier between themselves and a world of 
enemies. Inside the wall he could take breath. He could become 
for a time a man again, instead of a terrified beast. The wall 
was built, Aristotle tells us, that men might live, but its inner 
cause was that men might ‘live well’. It wasa ship ina great sea, 
says a character in Sophocles (4 vz. 191), whose straight sailing 
is the first condition of all faith or friendship between man and 
man, The old Koré or earth-maiden changes her type, and 
appears on coins wearing a crown made of a city-wall. The 
Polis had become itself the Mother-Goddess, binding together all 
who lived within its circuit and superseding all more personal 
worships. When this begins we have the germ of historical 
Greece. 

This religion of the Polis was, I think, in the later ages of 
Greece, the best, and is to us the most helpful, of ancient religions. 
It has this in common with the others, that it implies in each 

1 This is the use in Homer, preserved later in the words πολίζω, πόλισμα. 
Of course in safer times the cities spread and far outgrew the old Polis, which 
was then apt to be called Acropolis—as at Athens. And some warlike tribes 


went on living without a wall, κατὰ κώμας, like the Spartans and the Northern 
invaders of Italy. 


| 


| 


Π THE POLIS 59 


citizen the willing sacrifice of himself to something greater than 
himself. It has also to the full their passionate narrowness. 
But it differs from all the others in many things. It has its roots 
in knowledge and real human need, not in ignorance and terror. 
Its rules of conduct are based not on obedience to imaginary 
beings, but on serving mankind; not on observance of taboos, 
but on doing good. 

᾿Αρετὰ πολύμοχθε γένει βροτείῳ, says Aristotle in the first line 
of his one curious outbreak into lyrics, ‘ 4ve¢é much laboured 
for by the race of man.’ It is one of the common burdens of 
early Greek poetry, of Pindar, Hesiod, Phokylides, Simonides, 
this thirst of men for 4v7ezé, the word that we translate ‘ Virtue’. 
It is more, of course, than our Virtue; more even than the 
Roman Vzrtus. It is ‘goodness’ in all the senses in which 
objects can be called good, the quality of a good sword, a good 
horse, a good servant, or a good ruler. The religion of the 
Polis did essentially make men strive to be more of worth, to be 
‘good men’. Think fora moment of the judgements passed upon 
his characters by the Deuteronomic compiler of the Book of Kings. 
A sweeping judgement is passed for good or evil on almost 
every king; and on what is it based? First, on the question 
whether the king followed exactly the precepts and taboos 
ascribed to the deity worshipped by the writer; and secondly, 
whether he duly prevented even that deity being worshipped 
anywhere except at the writer's own temple. Great rulers like 
Jeroboam II or even like Omri, who is treated by the Assyrians 
as the very founder of Israel, are passed over with scarcely more 
than the mere statement that they ‘did evil in the sight of 
Yahweh’. 

Now the Jews who wrote under the influence of Deuteronomy 
represent a religion extraordinarily noble and enlightened. 
Compared with the immense majority of ancient religions it 
stands upon a mountain top. Yet contrast with these distorted 
judgements of the Deuteronomist those passed by Plato in the 
Gorgias on the great democratic statesmen of Athens. Plato 
was perhaps the most theologically-minded of the great Greek 
writers; he writes in the Gorgzas with great bitterness; and I 
think his judgements extremely prejudiced. Yet from beginning 
to end he bases his indictments of the various statesmen on one 


60 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC I 


question only, their service to their fellow men. Have they 
made Athens better and happier? It looksas if they had; but he 
denies it. ‘They have filled the city with docks and arsenals and 
tributes and such trash, instead of S6phrosyné and righteousness.’ 
It is the difference between a soul in bondage and a free soul. 
But to reach that freedom the Greeks had to pass first through 
fire and then through a great darkness. That is the subject 
which we will consider in detail in the next of these lectures. 


Na 


ΠῚ 
CHAOS: AIDOS AND NEMESIS 


I WISH in the present lecture to consider in detail some ot 
those sanctions of tribal custom and religion which were exposed 
to change or destruction in the anarchy of the great Migrations : 
and then, in the apparent wreck of all, to study the seed of 
regeneration which seems to have been left. 

I do not know that we can begin better than by following 
a curious by-path of the decline of tribal religion, the history of 
‘our brother the ox’. Not that it is specially characteristic of 
Greece. It occurred over most of Europe and Asia. But it is 
one of a multitude of changes that must have befallen with some 
intensity and sharpness of outline in the Dark Age of Greece. 

Professor Robertson Smith has shown with great skill the 
position of the domestic animals in the early agricultural tribes, 
both Aryan and Semitic. The tribe or kindred was the whole 
moral world to its members. Things outside the tribe were 
things with which no reasonable man concerned himself. So far 
as they forced themselves on the tribesmen’s attention, they were 
bad, unclean, hostile. And the tribe consisted of what? Of 
certain human beings, certain gods—one or more—and certain 
flocks of animals, The thing that made them one was, according 
to Dr. Robertson Smith’s most suggestive explanation, that 
sacred thing in which Life itself is, the common blood running in 
the veins of all. This statement is no doubt a little too explicit. 
The oneness of the tribe was a thing taken as obvious, not 
a thing reasoned about. But as far as there is any conscious 
analysis the blood seems to be taken as the ground of unity. It 
was in the flocks as much as in the men. Nay, sometimes 
rather more; since the god himself was often in some sense an 
ox, a sheep, or a camel. If we are, say, the Sons of Moab, then 
our God Chemosh is the god of Moab and our cattle are the 


62 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC Ill 


flocks of Moab. They have shared our food and we have drunk 
of their milk. The common blood runs in us all. 

It would actually seem, from the evidence, that certain early 
agricultural folk never used their domestic animals for ordinary 
food. They would not so shed the tribal blood. They killed 
wild animals, or, if chance offered, the cattle of strangers. Their 
own animals were not killed except for the definite purpose of 
sacrifice. 

Now, if anything went wrong with the tribe for any unknown 
cause, if the harvest was bad, the cattle sick, the water scarce, the 
neighbouring tribes overbearing, the cause was usually sought in 
the attitude of mind of the god. ‘The world was against them’ ; 
in other words Chemosh was angry with his people, or had 
forgotten them. His feeling for his kindred was becoming faint. 
It must be renewed. And the regular and almost universal 
method of renewing it was to take some of the living blood of 
the tribe, take it especially while warm and living and full of its 
miraculous force, and share it between the god and the people. 
You went where the god lived, or you called him to come to 
a particular pit or stone or heap of stones—an altar—and there, 
after due solemnities, you shed the sacred blood for him to drink. 
Feeding the god caused no great difficulty. It was easy to pour 
the blood into the pit or upon the altar: and that rite always 
remained. There was more awkwardness, and consequently 
more variety of usage, about providing for the tribesmen them- 
selves. For men began early to shrink from consuming raw 
flesh and blood, and devised other ways of appropriating the 
virtues of the miraculous liquid. 

There is only one criticism to pass on this. It is that Robert- 
son Smith’s discovery was a little greater than he realized. For 
he assumes a period in which there already exists some definite 
personal god with whom to share the sacrifice, and we know now 
that there was a previous period in which there was not yet 
a personal god. There was the tribal blood there was also the 
live animal that bore in it the life of the tribe, set apart and 
consecrated, till it became full of magical vitality. The personal 
god seems to have been made by abstraction and ‘ projection’ out 
of this magical χα, out of the ritual dances, the desires and 
fears of the tribe. The bull was not holy because the god had 


III ‘OUR? BROTHER THE: OX’ 63 


touched him ; the god himself only existed because the bull was 
so charged with holiness and creative power.’ Now, as you 
spared the ox in ordinary life because he was your brother and 
fellow labourer, so you slaughtered him on a great occasion for 
the same reason. Had he not been your brother, the sacrifice 
would have lacked half its power. If we consult the collections 
of anthropologists, we shall find many various ways in which 
this feeling of brotherhood with the domestic animal is expressed. 
The Todas of South India, for instance—that tribe to whom 
anthropologists owe so much—sacrifice a buffalo once a year 
only. When the victim falls, men, women, and children group 
themselves round its head, and fondle, caress, and kiss its face, 
and then give way to wailing and lamentation. In other cases 
you beg the animal’s forgiveness before slaying it, and explain to 
it the dire necessity of the case, or the high honour you are 
really conferring upon it. Or you arrange that it shall seem to 
desire to die. You make an elaborate apparatus for self-decep- 
tion, so that the beast may seem to ask you to let it die for the 
tribe.2 You even arrange that it shall kill itself. I do not think 
any clear distinction can be drawn here between the practices of 
different races. The early Aryan peoples seem to have had 
this conception, and therefore probably the Achaeans had it. 
Whereas, on the other hand, the clearest instances surviving in 
Greece in historical times seem to belong to the strata of more 
primitive peoples. The word applied to this slaughter of the 
domestic, the familiar and friendly, animal, is regularly φόνος, the 
legal word for ‘ murder’. And the Zocus classicus on the subject 
is Theophrastus’® description of the Athenian festival called 
Bouphonia, or Ox-murder, which contained an elaborate ritual 
for ridding the various actors in the ceremony from the guilt of 
the murder of their friend. The slayer flies for his life. Every 
one concerned in the ceremony is tried for murder. Those who 
drew water for the sharpening of the weapons are tried first: but 
they only drew the water, they did not sharpen the axe and 
knife. The sharpeners are next accused, and produce the men 


1 See note on ἢ. 275. 2 R. Smith, Religion of the Semites, Ὁ. 309. 

8 Cf. J. E. Harrison, Prolegomena, p. 111, note 1, and authorities there 
cited. There is a similar φόνος of a bear practised to-day in Saghalien. Cf. 
the sacral Bear-slaying in the Kalewala. 


64 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC ΠῚ 


to whom they gave the weapons after they were sharpened. 
These produce another man, who struck the victim down with 
the axe: he another, who cut its throat. This last man accuses 
the knife, which is solemnly pronounced guilty and thrown into 
the sea. And besides all this, it has been arranged that the ox 
shall have gone up to the altar of his own free will and eaten of the 
sacrificial grains, thereby showing that he wished to be slain. 
Further still, the dead ox is quickly stuffed, set on his feet, and 
yoked to a plough as if he had never been killed at all; it had 
all been a bad dream. 

Now what, in its ultimate element of human feeling, does this 
mean? When you have stripped off the hocus-pocus, the 
superstitious make-believe of getting rid of pollution by a number 
of dodges which can deceive no one, there remains at the back 
a seed of simple human feeling that the act of slaying your old 
kinsman and fellow worker is rather horrible: the feeling that 
any honest man has about the killing of a pet lamb for food. It 
was a thing, so Greek tradition tells us, that man in the golden 
age did not do.’ 

The Bouphonia took place in Attica, where there was, practi- 
cally speaking, no violent migration, and where a large element 
of the ‘old population mingled gradually and peacefully with 
a small element of the new. One finds traces of the same spirit 
in the epics of the mainland. Hesiod, in this respect represent- 
ing a stationary society which had either recovered from the 
violence of the Migrations or had preserved throughout them 
much of the peaceful agricultural tradition, always speaks of the 
ox as a sort of kinsman and partner. ‘A house, an ox, and 
a woman’ (Z7ga, 405) are what man needs for the facing of the 
world. Hesiod (Z7ga, 436 ff.) likes his ox to be nine years old: 
his ploughman to be forty, and not stinted of his due dinner of 
bread. You know one another's ways by that time, and feel 
comfortable together. Clearly a nine-year-old ox is not kept for 
eating. Notice again how Hesiod speaks of keeping the oxen 
indoors and well fed in the cold weather (Z7ga, 452; contrast 


1R. Smith, Religion of Semites, p. 304, and Plat. Laws, 782 ( ᾽Ορφικοί 
τινες Biot. ‘Plutarch’ in his brilliant essays περὶ Sapxopayias takes just the 
opposite view: the savage can be excused for flesh-eating, the civilized man 
not. 


III HESIOD’S OX 65 


559); of the east winds (Aga, 504) in the month of Lenaion, 
‘ evil days, they just skin the ox, all of them’; of the cold dawn, 
how ‘it puts yokes on many oxen’ (Z£7ga, 580). During the 
winter storms, too, you and your little girls can sit inside by the 
fire and keep warm, but the wind blows through the ox’s hide, 
it cannot be kept out, and through the fell of the shaggiest goat. 
But not the sheep. Their wool is too thick, and they do not 
mind (£7¢a, 512 ff.). Do you observe the sentiment of it all ? 
How the ox is a friend, a member of the family. 

The name they kept for him tells the same story. You will 
remember the regular phrase in the older poetry εἰλίποδας 
ἕλικας βοῦς, the two epithets of rather dim and unrealized 
meaning that are habitually applied to cattle. Εἰλίποδες, 
‘rolling the feet ’, is an antithesis to the word applied to horses, 
ἀερσίποδες, ‘ lifting the feet’. A horse steps high, a cow’s foot 
makes a more horizontal curve. And what of the other word 
ἕλικεο")ΥῪ The Greeks understood it as ‘curly-horned’, the 
opposite of Body ὀρθοκραιράων, ‘straight-horned cattle’. There 
were the two breeds in early Greece. But one should notice 
this about the two adjectives: that they both belong to the class 
of familiar names or nicknames applied to well-known animals— 
names like ‘ puss’ and‘ bunny’. Hesiod, our earliest farm-yard 
poet, is full of such names: he has a nickname even for the ant 
and the snail and the octopus, ‘ wise-wit’ (778) and ‘ house-carrier ’ 
and ‘ no-bones’ respectively—The hare is πτώξ, ‘ trembler,’ and 
the goat μηκάς, ‘ bleater,’ the hog, rather less politely, is σίαλος, 
‘grease. 1 And this explains a little difficulty. “EHA:«ces means 
‘curly’,or ‘crumpled’; and Dr. Leaf, in his invaluable commen- 
tary to the //zad, objects that it is scarcely possible language to 
speak of a ‘crumpled cow’ when you mean a cow with crumpled 
horns. ‘True, if the word were still a simple adjective with no 
special connotations. But it is not: it is a name, almost a pet- 
name. When Hesiod’s forty-year-old ploughman came down as 


1 Unless indeed σίαλος merely meant (1) hog, (2) hog’s grease. Sheep 
seem to have no nickname.—In general cf. 530 ff., where ‘the horned and 
hornless wood-sleepers’ in a snowstorm go with ‘their tails between their 
legs, like a lame man bent over his stick. It is the same spirit. There is 
intimacy with animals in general, even the snake in the new fragments is 
‘No-hair,’ ἄτριχος (Berl. Klassikertexte, V. 1, Ὁ. 36); a wild boar is ‘ spear- 
stopper’, ᾿ἀσχέδωρος. But with the ox there is much more. 


2760 F 


66 THE -RISE“OF “THE “CREEK EPIC lll 


usual rather before dawn and met his nine-year-old cow, I 
suppose he addressed her as “7 εχ ; he said, ‘Good morning, 
Crumple.’ 

And when for some grave reason this cow or ox had to be— 
what shall we say ?>—‘ murdered’ is the old Greek word—it was 
a solemn occasion. ‘Take a case where the feeling is already less 
keen, the sacrifice at Nestor’s house at Pylos in the third book of 
the Odyssey (421-63). Nestor is, of course, a Homeric hero, but 
he is now back at home, under the normal influences of home life. 
The occasion is a special one. There has been a visible appear- 
ance of Pallas Athena, and it is necessary to honour her, perhaps 
to renew the tribal bond with her, in an extraordinary way. 
‘Let some one go to the field,’ says Nestor, ‘ for a cow ; and the 
ox-herd is to come with him. And bring also the goldsmith 
Laerkes, to put gold on the horns of the cow. And everybody 
wait here.’ Then follows a solemn description of all the 
apparatus and the details: the goldsmith’s tools and work: the 
purification of every person present to receive what may be called 
the sacrament of the kindred blood: the suitable sacrificial 
vessels placed so that it may not be spilt upon the ground— 
where it might pollute the earth or even cry for vengeance: the 
man appointed to strike, and the man appointed to cut the throat, 
Then, as the cow is struck,‘ the daughters and the daughters-in- 
law and the august wife of Nestor all shouted aloud.’ It was not 
a mere cry of sorrow, it was an o/o/zigé,a special religious cry for 
frightening away evil influences from the stream of ‘ our brother’s’ 
sacred life.’ One would like to know if there was originally 
something of that in the wail of the Todas. 


1 You uttered an o/o/igé when any one had a fit, to frighten away the bad 
kér which had seized him; in the case of Jason’s princess (J/edea, 1170-7) 
it proves to be something much worse than a fit, and the o/ol/gé turns into 
a wail of horror. For brotherly feeling toward the ox cf. Aelian, Κα H. 5. 14; 
an old law at Athens says, ‘Slay not the ox accustomed to plough or waggon, 
for this animal shares the labours of man.’ Also Plut. Soon, 21: Solon 
forbade sacrifice of oxen at funerals. (Probably for religious rather than 
sumptuary reasons.) Cf, Hollis, 716 Mandi, p. 20: ‘They [the Nandi 
tribes] love their beasts, as they say themselves, more than anything in the 
world: they talk to, pet, and coax them, and their grief is great when a 
favourite sickens and dies.’ I owe this reference to Mr. W. R. Halliday. — 
I know of two Papuans who committed a motiveless murder from pure rage 
and grief at the death of a favourite pig. There is also a ritual in Papua in 
which the men kill a boar with clubs: the women wail, and then chase the 
slayers into a river. 


* 


ΠῚ HOMER'S OXEN 67 


Contrast with this timid, religious, almost tender slaying of the 
ox, the habitual sacrifices of the //ad—and of those parts of the 
Odyssey where the sacrificer is not in his own land. Compared 
with Nestor’s sacrifice, they seem like the massacres of a slaughter- 
house, followed by the gorging of pirates. The heroes make 
merry, ‘Slaughtering sheep beyond number and crook-horned 
swing-footed oxen.’ They ‘sit all day long even to the setting 
sun feasting on measureless ox-flesh and sweet strong wine’. 
The sacrificial terms are there, but are somehow shortened and 
made brutal. The only people in the Odyssey who behave like 
that are, first, the wicked suitors, who devour Odysseus’ flocks ; 
and secondly, Odysseus’ own men when they are acting as pirates, 
and slaughtering the herds of the Cicones. These exceptions 
give us the clue. The heroes of the //ad have crossed the sea, 
and are no longer dealing with their own kindred. The oxen 
they slaughter in droves are only strangers’ oxen, not their own 
familiar herds. They kill them as light-heartedly as they would 
kill the strangers themselves. They think no more of the ox as 
a member of their tribe. The distinction of their hecatombs lies 
only in the general largeness and expensiveness of the whole 
proceeding. 

It may be objected to my method here, that the difference in 
question is merely that between peace and war, and is not 
specially connected with the Migrations. My whole answer to 
that willcome gradually. But it is at least the difference between 
peace and a prolonged and disorganized state of war in which 
ordinary wont and use has been forgotten. And that was just 
the state produced by the Migrations. Of course Homer’s 
picture is in a dozen ways idealized and removed from history. 
Yet, in the main, the chiefs of the //7ad, adventurers who have 
forced a landing on a foreign shore and live in huts on the beach, 
year out, year in, supporting themselves by plunder and decimated 
by pestilences, never quite strong enough to capture the native 
city, nor weak enough to be finally driven into the sea, are exactly 
in the normal position of these outcasts of the Migrations. In 
their minds, as Achilles expresses it, ληϊστοὶ μὲν γάρ re Bbes— 
‘cattle can be got in raids’, But let us consider the other 
influences that held these men before the Migrations, and see 
what became of them afterwards. 

Ε 2 


68 THE RISE OF THE’ CREEK ΕΒ ΠῚ 


First, then, their definite gods.| The Achaeans at one time 
must have been organized in tribes, or federations of tribes, and 
a tribe must naturally have a tribal god. The conception may 
seem somewhat abstract, because in the Greek pantheon as we 
know it every personal god has behind him a long and tangled 
history. Each has been made up out of very many elements, of 
diverse origin, attached by historical processes to some one name 
—or perhaps two names, since so many Greek deities have at 
least two—and welded eventually into a sort of fictional unity by 
the devices of the poets. Even Zeus, the northern patriarchal 
Sky-god, suffered many modifications: for example, when for 
purposes of theological harmony he was transformed into the 
long-lost son of his conquered enemy, ‘ Pelasgian’ Kronos, Let 
us think away these historical complications, and consider what 
would probably happen to a pre-Hellenic migrant Achaean with 
regard to his tribal god. The, business of that god was, of course, 
to fight for and protect his tribe. His character, and his attributes, 
so far as he had any, were, for the most part, simply the character 
and attributes of the tribe. That is, to the tribesmen themselves 
he had no noticeable character: he was just what a reasonable 
god naturally would be. If they used bows, so presumably did 
he: but they did not think the matter worth mentioning. If 
they were characteristically bards, smiths, seafarers, spearmen, 
mine-workers, naturally their god presided over all they did. 
Thus to a stranger coming across the tribe the god would 
produce a definite impression: he would be a smith, a ruler 
of the sea, a spearman, a god of mines, a singer. That is 
perhaps how, when a federation of tribes was made, there arose 
departmental gods, with special attributes and almost always 
special geographical homes: a Lemnian Hephaistos, an Athenian 
Pallas, an Argive Hera, a Cyprian or Cytherean Aphrodite. 

Now, as long as the tribe remained whole, the god of course 
was with it. He had his definite dwelling-places: the Pytho 
or Patara, the Bethel or Mamre, where he could be counted upon 
to appear. Even when the tribe moved, he, in a slow and 
reluctant way, moved with it. He was present wherever the 


1 Some types of pastoral and agricultural gods and divine kings might 
be treated here, but the same argument can easily be applied to them. 
See pp. 135 and 205 ff. below, Lectures Vand VIII. Also above, note on p. 49. 


ΠῚ TRIBAL GODS 69 


tribe was, though on great occasions it might be safer that the 
chiefs should send embassies back to him, to make sacrifice at 
some Dodona, some Sinai, some Carmel, where he had for certain 
been present to their fathers. 

But in these sea-migrations the tribe was never whole. The 
chieftains can still call on their Achaean Zeus, and he hears or 
rejects their call: but there is a feeling that he is not present as 
he once was. He has to be called by his old names, with a 
feeling of the distance that lies between: ‘ Zeus, prays Achilles 
at Troy, ‘Lord, thou of Dodona,! thou Pelasgian, dwelling far 
away. The titles—whatever ‘ Pelasgian’ may mean—serve the 
purpose of showing that you really know who he is and belong 
tohim. Our old Thessalian Zeus seated on his throne at Dodona, 
why should he listen to the crying of strange men in Asia? 
‘There be very many things between, shadowy mountains and 
ever-sounding sea.’ But each of these words will attract his 
attention. It is as if Achilles said, ‘ Zeus, thou who art my own 
lord, who hast known my fathers at Dodona.’ 

Zeus did, in a way, move from mountain to mountain, just as 
the Muses did. The Muses were first at home in Pieria and 
Olympus, and then moved south to Helicon and Parnassus, 
doubtless accompanying their worshippers. Zeus was actually 
established on Mount Ida in front of Troy when Achilles prayed to 
him as Dodonaean. He had come there with his Phrygians long 
since. But the Zeus of Mount Ida was the god of Troy, and 
surely could not accept the prayer of Troy’s enemies, There 
is a painful embarrassment. Zeus of Dodona is opposed to Zeus 
of Ida. The tribe is divided against itself? 

Even in the 7#ad, amid all its poetical refurbishment of life, 
there remain these unconscious marks of the breaking up of the 
Achaeans. But it is clear from those cases which we considered of 
the various Ionian colonies that the real Greek settlements of 
the migration consisted of the most miscellaneous gatherings 
from various tribes, together, I should imagine, with a leaven of 
broken men, whose tribal belongings were forgotten. Now 
among such a σύμμεικτον πλῆθος ---ϑΘ 10 a ‘mixed multitude’ as 


1 Zed ἄνα, Δωδωναῖε, Πελασγικέ, Π 233. Zenodotus, Φηγωναῖε: evidently a 
good and ancient variant : ‘thou of the Oak Tree.’ 
* Cf. above, Lecture II, p. 49, about Zeus, Athena and Apollo. 


70 THE RISE OF THE’ GREEK EPIC Il 


Strabo phrases it—the influence of the definite tribal gods would 
be reduced almost to nothing. The common ‘ Wall’ has to 
supersede them. Partly perhaps from some innate tendency of 
the mind, but largely also from the force of circumstances, there 
is a diametric opposition in this matter between Greeks and Jews. 
The Jews seem to have found their kinsmen in Moab worshipping 
a tribal god, Chemosh, according to rites practically identical 
with their own. They, or at least the sacerdotal party which 
prevailed among them, immediately regarded Chemosh as an 
enemy and a devil, and where they observed some small differ- 
ence in the ritual they magnified it and regarded it with loathing. 
The ordinary Greeks would have said: ‘ The Moabites call Zeus 
Chemosh, though some say he is Heracles rather than Zeus.’ 

Now, when gods are fused or renamed like this, they must 
needs become less living and definite. For one thing, the taboos 
or sacred practices change. In Greece itself some people who 
would have died rather than eat a mouse seem to have mingled 
with others who felt in the same way about lizards. Their gods 
were both identified with Apollo... When an avoider of mice 
found his friend eating mice freely near Apollo’s temple and 
meeting with no condign punishment, he must naturally have 
been filled with religious anger. For a generation or so the 
anger may have remained, latent or visible. But eventually, it 
would seem, a time came when both parties ate what they liked, 
and both, on the other hand, paid an easy toll to their gods 
by joining in solemn sacrifices of the taboo animals on suitable 
days. The religion had come into conflict with the common 
conveniencies of life, and been beaten. 


A tribal god, as we have seen, could move. As long as any 
fair number of his tribe could keep together, he was present 
among them. But other objects of worship were not movable. 
Among the pre-Greek populations the most prevailing and 
important worship was that of the dead. All Asia Minor is still 
strewn with the graves of innumerable worthies, whom the course 
of history has turned into Mahometan Walis or Christian Saints. 
The old races called them ‘ Heroes’. They were much the same 


1 Apollo Smintheus (A 39): cf. Isaiah Ixvi. 17, and the original form of 
Sauroctonos. On Smintheus see Lang, Custom and Myth, pp. 103-20. 


ΠῚ ‘ THE DEAD: HEROES 71 


as the Roman Lares, ghosts of dead friends and ancestors, duly 
laid in the earth and worshipped with a few simple ceremonies 
and small regular offerings of food and drink.' Good scholars 
have written of this worship as if it consisted entirely in the fear 
and placation of dangerous ghosts. In later writers, like Plutarch, 
there is evidence that points in this direction. But originally and 
normally it is clear that this was not the spirit of ancestor-worship. 
The ghost of the friend who loved you loves you still, unless you 
in some way starve or injure him. The dangerous ghost is the 
ghost of a strange kin. This conception certainly affected the 
whole of Greece, and was one of the strongest religious bonds 
regulating’private life. The gigantic tombs of the great kings of 
legend, alien and steeped in crime, dominated the imagination of 
the mainland right on into the classical period. Both Aegean 
and Northerner were bound to their tombs by a thousand 
delicate and powerful ties. 

But the men of the Migrations had left their fathers’ graves 
behind them. The ghosts whom they ought to have fed and 
cared for were waiting in the old lands helpless, with parched 
lips, staring through the dark earth that lay above them.2, And 
in the new lands where now they trod they were surrounded by 
strange graves where lay not their own fathers, but the fathers of 
the men they had wronged and slain, ghosts who hated them. 
All later Greece was full of these unknown graves. They 
devised many ceremonies to appease the ghosts. For one thing, 
they were honestly frightened. For another, they knew that 
their own dead were lying in the same condition, and they 
vaguely trusted that perhaps at home also the strangers were 
doing wellbythem. But it is a timid, uncertain honour that they 
give. They may at any time be bearing some particular pollution 
which specially kindles the dead man’s rage. They know not 


' Babrius (second century A.D.?) says definitely (fab. 63) that the gods 
are the cause of good, the heroes of evil. Similarly, the still later Sallustius 
says that god causes good, and the daemon evil. This becomes the normal 
sense of δαίμων in post-Christian writing. But contrast Hesiod, Evga, 
123 ff., where the Heroes are blessed guardian angels, δαίμονες ἐσθλοί. The 
account in Paus. vi. 9. 8 of the mad Cleomedes of Astypalaea illustrates the 
sinister kind of hero. For the whole conception compare the Choéphoroe 
or the Oedipus Coloneus: the hero lies in the grave charged full of curses 
and blessings. Cf. Harrison, Prol/egomena, p. 9, pp. 326 ff. 

* Cf., for instance, Eur, 770. 1083 σὺ μὲν φθίμενος ἀλαίνεις, ἄθαπτος ἄνυδρος, 


72 THE RISE ΘΕ THE GREEK: EPIC ΠῚ 


his name, and cannot call him. He is only the Hero, one of the 
sainted dead, the εὔφρονες, the χρηστοί." 

One thing indeed they could contrive, in rare cases, by the help 
of their best avé¢éres, the medicine-men and makers of charms. 
They could call the soul of their own dead hero from his grave 
and keep it following their ships to the new settlement, there to 
enter into an empty tomb which they had made for it. In this 
way Phrixus, who had died in Colchis at the farther end of the 
Black Sea, was brought back to Thessaly. In this way 
Melanippus was brought from his ancient grave in Thebes to 
Sikyon,in the hope that his presence would cause his old enemy 
Adrastus to move to a new grave further away.? Achilles seems 
to have changed his grave several times, from Phthia to Skyros, 
from Skyros to Troy, from Troy to the happy island of Leuce. 
But there were difficulties in this process. A people flying from 
a conquering foe could never carry it out. And perhaps the 
practice itself was not very old. It seems to have needed the 
help of a doctrine about the soul rather less concrete and material 
than that of the old Aegean races. And oné doubts whether, 
when all was done, the ritual always carried conviction. 

Very often the tomb of the dead hero had oracular powers. 
His children in their perplexities could draw upon the wisdom of 
their great ancestor, as the Persians in Aeschylus’ tragedy seek 
counsel from their dead Darius.* Probably these oracles formed 
the greatest engine of divine authority in most of the pre-Hellenic 
tribes. And, as far as one can make out, an oracle never moved. 
When a change of population took place, either it was forgotten, 
as happened often and often; or else it was for some reason 
spared or partly annexed by the new possessors of the land. 
Priests of the old race were often left in charge, and the old 


1 As to these nameless or unknown ‘heroes’ the clearest evidence is 
Diog. Laert. i. 10. 3, ‘ one finds even now kara τοὺς δήμους τῶν Αθηναίων βωμοὺς 
ἀνωνύμους. Perhaps also the frequent anonymous inscriptions—‘Ikeovos 
ἥρωι ἀνέθηκε, ἥρωι ὁ dpos, ὅς. For particular cases cf. Paus. iii. 13. 7 
(ἥρως τις), X. 33. 9 (δυνάστης ἀνήρ): in x. 4. 10 the unknown person has 
become ‘either Xanthippus or Phocus’. Soi. 35.7, ‘he is not really Geryon, 
but only Hyllus!’ vi. 6. 7 ff. he is evil, hostile, and nameless, and is at last 
driven out. Cf. also i. 43. 3 (Aisymnion at Megara), i. 34. 3, v. 15. 12 
τ (generalizing the dead). 

? Pind. Pyth. iv. 159, cf. Eustath. Odyssey, p. 1614 on ἀνάκλησις: Melanippus, 
Hadt. v. 67. 

* On Oracles, cf. my Four Stages, p. 51 f. 


ΙΠ THE GRAVE NOT SAFE 73 


worshippers, when a time of safety came, could make pilgrimages 
back to it. Nearly all the oracles of Greece were talken over on 
terms by the incoming Northmen. The holy place ev deddgois, 
among the Delphians, which had once belonged in joint owner- 
ship to an Earth-Mother and an underworld serpent, typical of 
some departed hero, passed over, with or without battle, to the 
Olympian prophet, Apollo. Apollo took the oracle of the 
Abantes at Abae and that of the Carian clan of the Branchidae 
among the barbarians in the neighbourhood of Miletus. On the 
other hand, for some reason or other he left the Lebadean hero, 
Trophénius, in peace, and the dead man continued to give 
oracular dreams in the old cave according to the old rites. But 
our present concern is with the men of the Migrations. What- 
ever happened, they were cut off from their dead. To those 
fugitive Abantes, for instance, who helped to settle Chios, it 
mattered little whether their deserted oracle at Abae still spoke 
or was silent for ever. They at any rate had no guidance 
from it. 


Nay : there was something worse. At times like these of the 
Migrations it was best not to bury your dead, unless indeed you 
could be sure of defending their graves. For you have all of you 
now done, and are doing, things which must make men hate you 
as your fathers and grandfathers were never hated in their 
ordinary intertribal wars. You are taking from men everything 
that they live by, their land, homes, wives, cattle, gods, and the 
graves of their fathers. And the beaten remnant of those you 
have wronged, unable to requite in due kind your many murders, 
are skulking round by night, as you well know, homeless and 
mad with rage, to do youany chance harm they can. They may 
catch some wounded men, some women, or children. They may 
sometimes carry off some dead from the field of battle. At the 
worst they can dig up some of your fallen comrades from their 
graves. And then will be repeated the well-known orgy of 
helpless, pitiful revenge, the lust of unhappy hate trying in 
a hundred ways to find its peace. For however magnificent you 
may be, you conquering races, you cannot make men broken- 
hearted with entire impunity. 

There is hardly anything in Greek antiquity which is so 


74 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC ΠῚ 


surrounded with intense feeling as this matter of the mutilation 
or dishonouring of the dead. Throughout all poetry, through 
the Epos, tragedy, and the historians, it rings, a hushed and 
vibrating note, telling of something scarce to be spoken, a thing 
which to see makes men mad. Scholars are apt to apologize for 
this earnestness as a peculiarity of ancient feeling which we have 
a difficulty in understanding. But I fancy that every one who 
has come across the reality feels much the same as a Greek did ; 
English soldiers who find their dead comrades mutilated in wars 
with savages, or the combatants on both sides in the sempiternal 
strife in the south-east of Europe, where Christian and Moslem 
still are apt to dishonour infidel corpses. 

There was one perfect way of saving your dead from all out- 
rage. You could burn them into their ultimate dust... The 
practice was the less painful to the feelings of the survivors, 
inasmuch as the Northerners, who were now influential among 
them, had used it in their old homes, in the forest country from 
which they came. For cremation, like the other Homeric 
custom of roasting meat, is a practice which demands abundance 
of wood. But in Greece the other system seems generally to 
have held its own. Even at Mycenae, where there were Nor- 
therners in possession, the dead are buried, not burned. And 
Greek language about the other life is on the whole far more 
affected by the conceptions dependent on burial. The dead are 
always χθόνιοι, ‘people of the earth’; their realm is below. 
The ghosts are not thought of as so much κνίση, or vapour of 
burnt flesh. And the practice of cremation might well have been 
forgotten entirely had not this special time of unrest revived it. 
The grave was no longer safe. And men burned their comrades 


1 Cf. 1 Sam. xxxi. 12, where the men of Jabesh-gilead burn the bodies of 
Saul and his son, to save them from further outrage by the Philistines. 
Burning seems to have been strongly against Israelite feeling ; many com- 
mentators emend the text. Andrew Lang suggested to me to compare 
Amos vi. 10 (obscure), Jeremiah xxxiv. 5 (Zedekiah: ‘ with the burnings 
of thy fathers’), 2 Chronicles xvi. 14 and xxi. 19 (Asa and Jehoram). In 
Scandinavia there is some evidence to show that cremation came in with 
the cult of Othin. Othin’s dead were burned and their souls went off to 
Valhall. In the older belief they were buried or ‘ howe-laid’, and stayed, 
souls and all, in the howe, and ‘ exercised a beneficent influence on the for- 
tunes of the family’, or defended the grave when it was broken into. This 
is curiously similar to the condition in Greece. See Chadwick, (μά of Othin, 


Ρ- 58. 


ΠῚ THE EARTH MAIDENS 75 


to save them from dogs, birds, and enemies. Sometimes we find 
that, instead of burning, they buried them in peculiarly sacred 
places, or in unknown and secret graves, for the same reason: 
Lest angry men 
Should find their bones and cast them out again 
Τὸ ενυἹ].} 

There was another form of worship which might have been 
expected to persist, or at least quickly to recover itself. 
Throughout the region that we are concerned with, from Wes- 
tern Greece to the heart of Asia Minor, it seems as if every 
little community in pre-Hellenic times had worshipped a certain 
almost uniform type of goddess.2- An Earth-Mother or Moun- 
tain-Mother in the eastern and the pre-Hellenic communities, 
Mother of fruits and trees and of wild beasts, she is apt to be a 
Maiden and a Bride as well, and in Greek lands is perhaps best 
imagined as a Koré (Maiden). She is really the Earth as 
Woman, passing at different times through all the different 
normal phases of woman’s life. Sometimes the intoxication of 
the east is strong upon her, and, like Babylonian Ishtar, she is in 
her own person all that woman can be. She is at once virgin, 
mother, sister, wife and harlot, and her virginity is ever renewed. 
She rears and nurses the Kowvoz, or men-children, of the tribe. 
The tribe itself is her Kouros, her child and in the end her 
husband or lover. When Greek Séphrosyné prevails there is 
an end, generally, to these dangerous confusions; Mother-Earth 
is distinguished from her Maiden daughter, and both protect the 
purity of the home. 

As we meet the full-blown deities of classical Greece we find 
this original Earth-Koré embodied in various types. There is 
of course the Koré par excellence, daughter of Demeter, whose 
more terrible name Persephoné is seldom spoken. But there 
are many others. The ‘Athenaia Koré’ has been transmuted 
into the Virgin Pallas; her Kouros is an Odysseus or a Perseus, 
whom she guides towards virtue and wisdom. The Argive 


1 Eur. Med. 1380. 

2 See J. E. Harrison, Prolegomena, pp. 257-322, ‘The making of a 
Goddess’: W. M. Ramsay, Czties and Bishoprics of Phrygia, i. 87 ff.: 
Hastings, Dictionary of the Bible, extra vol., p. 135 f.: Frazer, A¢tis, &c., 
chap. 111, and Golden Bough: and A. Evans in Δ H. S. xxi. pp. 170-80, and 
Brass A, 1X. ἢ. 85 ἢ 


76 THE RISE OF THE ‘GREEK EPIC ΠῚ 


Koré has become Hera, the wife of Zeus: she has now no kouros, 
though she watches over Jason and others, and perhaps she once 
had Heracles to train in hard ordeals. Others are merged in 
virgin Artemis, with her saintly votary Hippolytus; or in the 
opposite figure of the Cyprian Koré, Aphrodite, with her beloved 
Adonis. At the back of such figures, in the dim distance, is an 
old tribal organization, still alive in many parts of the world, 
called by the general name of Initiations, or sometimes Mysteries.! 
The boys on reaching maturity are taken to the Man’s House, 
learn their dances, pass through their ordeals or ‘completions’ 
(τελεταί), and become, by initiation into the Mysteries, full men of 
the tribe, fit to beget the tribe’s children, to plough the tribe's 
earth, and to stand in war against the tribe’s enemies. 

The Kouros is as prominent among Greek gods as the Koré 
among goddesses. Apollo, Ares, Hermes are typical kouroi; 
in the recently discovered Cretan Hymn of the Kourétes the 
Megistos Kouros, Greatest of Kouroi, who leads the mystic dance 
of initiation, is Zeus himself. And of course the same conception 
has left its mark on most of the heroes. Doubtless in settled 
conditions, where order and Themis held their own, the ordeals 
and the teaching that prepared for them had a great influence 
on character. The Australian and Red Indian evidence proves 
this, without drawing on the enthusiastic testimony borne by 
ancient writers to the moral influence of the Mysteries. But 
when a tribe was broken, flying or fighting for its life, the 
august rules of Themis must have gone by the board and the 
moral training become chiefly an apprenticeship in brigandage. 

Now, one set of agricultural people driven over seas and taking 
refuge in the land of another would, as far as one can guess, 
generally find themselves in the midst of the worship of another 
Koré so close to their own that they could at once accept her. 
Yet one must remember, first, that the fugitives were as a rule cut 
off for some time from agriculture: and secondly, that every 
Koré was certain to have secret rites and perhaps a secret name 
to which the strangers would not be admitted. As a matter of 
fact, there is something to be deduced from the geographical 


1 On these Avtes de Passage see J. E. Harrison, Them7s, chap. 1, 2: my 
Four Stages, chap. 1: Webster, Primitive Secret Societées: Schurtz, 
Altersklassen und Mannerbunde. 


ΠῚ THE EARTH MAIDENS 77 


names which remained in vogue for the various Korai. If names 
like Paphia, Cypris, Cytherea, Erycina, &c. persist throughout 
antiquity, it clearly means that, even when a certain set of Korai 
were definitely merged under the name of Aphrodite, still Our 
Lady of Paphos was felt to be different from Our Lady of 
Cythéra or of Eryx. It is worth while remembering that even 
at the present day in Spain the people of two neighbouring 
villages will throw stones at one another’s Madonna! Frazer ® 
and others have shown how much of the taboos and moral ideals 
of primitive communities were bound up with the Corn Maiden 
and her Mother. But all must have been rudely broken and 
destroyed for the generations of the flight by sea. 

In one respect especially this antique worship of the Koré was 
bound up, if we may believe some of the ablest of modern investi- 
gators, with the influences of daily domestic life. We must 
distinguish two forms of the family in early Greece, which 
corresponded roughly, though not exactly, with a division of 
races.» The Northerners had, as had been abundantly proved, 
the regular Aryan organization of the family under the headship 
of the male. The women and the children were 272 manu etus, 
under his hand. He had accepted the duty of defending them 
against danger, and they correspondingly had to obey his will. 
Relationship was counted through the male side, and the son suc- 
ceeded to his father’s estate. Indeed it is remarked by Isaeus that 
a mother, though by nature the closest relation a man can have, 
is not mentioned in the list of degrees of kinship in Attic Law.* 

1 Cf. the following extract from an account of the eruption of Etna in 
June 1923: 

‘At Piedimonti the population brought out from the church the statue of 
St. Anthony, their patron saint, and placed it in the central square of the 
village. 

‘At Linguaglossa on Tuesday morning the inhabitants took the pastoral 
staff from the statue of St. Egidius, the patron saint of Linguaglossa, and 
carried it ina supplicatory procession along the front of the lava. The popular 
belief is that on a previous occasion the staff of the saint had miraculously 
stayed the descent of the lava. But the population of Castiglione, when it 
heard of this procession, became excited and alarmed. The miracle, they 
thought, might have resulted in diverting the course of the lava from the 
direction of Linguaglossa to that of Castiglione. Therefore they marched to 
Linguaglossa, intending to stop the procession. A fight ensued.’ 

? Cf. especially Psyche’s Task. 

* Cf. the Auge (Heracles) and Aithra (Theseus) stories, and above, p. 47, note. 

4 Isaeus xi. 17 (μητρὸς ὄνομα) ὃ συγγενέστατον μὲν ἢν τῇ φύσει πάντων, ἐν δὲ 
ταῖς ἀγχιστείαις ὁμολογουμένως οὐκ ἔστιν. 


78 THE. RISE (OF THE: GREEK. EPIC ΠῚ 


Monogamy was the rule in Greece, though not among the 
Trojans. 

But this patriarchal system, however defective it may seem to 
modern critics, and however much it was corrected by the 
humanity of later Greek Law, was in its day an innovation and 
a radical reform. Among the pre-Hellenic tribes the mother 
was the natural centre of the family. She stayed and ruled the 
household, while men fought and hunted and wandered. One 
family might easily have different fathers or even uncertain 
fathers; and when the mother wanted a male protector she 
turned to her brother, not to one of her mates. The children 
were directed by their maternal uncle. The property descended 
from mother to daughter. The sons, we have reason to believe, 
generally provided them with dowries. 

It is curious to read the conflicting enthusiasms felt for and 
against this ‘matriarchal’ or ‘ matrilinear’ system by feminists 
and anti-feminists at the present day. Clearly one of the two 
systems was suited to one type of society and one to another. 
But both were families.1 Both must have possessed that power 
of trying the temper and training the character in which the 
family stands unrivalled. An institution in which life becomes 
unbearable unless people treat each other with pretty constant 
consideration, and habitually suppress their own more lunatic 
claims, is clearly of enormous educational value. History seems, 
up to the present, to have decided in favour of putting the 
family under the more intellectual and muscular though less 
sympathetic and affectionate head. And at times such as we are 
considering, when life was rough and hard, the weaker part of 
the human race very likely made a good bargain in exchanging 
freedom for protection. But it is important to remember, when 
we glibly speak of the higher conception of morals and the 
purer family life of the patriarchal Aryans, that after all the 
relation of mother to child is probably, even to our ideas, the 
deepest, most influential, and, if I may use such a word, the 
most holy of human relationships. And this relation was not 

1 See especially Tylor in Zhe Nineteenth Century, July, 1896: A. B. Cook, 
Classical Review, xx. 7 (‘Who was the wife of Zeus?’): Farnell, in Archiv 
fiir Religionswissenschaft, 1904, vii (severely critical): Frazer, Kinugshifp, 


Lecture VIII. The subject is admirably treated in Vinogradoff’s A’zstorical 
Jurisprudence, vol.i. pt. 1, The Elements of the Family. 


for EARTH MAIDENS; THE TWO FAMILIES 79 


only preserved by the older system, but was preserved in a 
clearer and more authoritative form. The influence of the 
patriarchate on religion is, of course, overpoweringly great. 
Protestant and Mahometan countries are entirely dominated by 
it. Yet if one tries to think for a moment of the vast volume of 
prayer that is steaming to heaven at any one hour from all the 
corners of the world, or, shall we say, of Christendom, I wonder 
if he will find any more intense, more human, more likely to 
achieve its end, than the supplication which rises from all parts 
of Southern and Eastern Europe to that most ancient and many- 
named Madonna, who has sat throned upon her rocks and been 
a mother of many erring children from thousands of years before 
the coming of Christianity. And further, if a man, who believes 
somehow in the reality and ultimate worth of some religion of 
gentleness or unselfishness, looks through the waste of nature to 
find support for his faith, it is probably in the phenomena of 
motherhood that he will find it first and most strikingly. Every 
living animal preys upon every other: true: yet a mother 
partridge will fight a dog to save her chickens, and a tigress die 
in defence of her cubs. The religious system connected with the 
matriarchal household, based on the relation of mother to child 
and no other, must be counted, I think, among the great civiliz- 
ing and elevating influences of mankind. 

And, though this point is perhaps taking us too long, ought 
we not also to consider the extreme beauty of those fragments or 


- elements of the Greek saga in which the young hero is befriended 


and counselled by a mother or a guardian goddess? Think of 
Heracles and Athena, Odysseus and Athena, Perseus and Athena, 
Jason and Hera, Achilles and Thetis. Achilles, we are duly 
informed, was the son of Peleus. Peleus in himself is a great 
saga-figure ; and it is a fine story how he caught and won his 
sea-goddess, how she bore his son, and how, being divine, in the 
end she could not dwell with him, but went back to her blue salt 
caverns. Yet how little, as a rule, Peleus matters to his son! 
When Achilles is in grief it is to his mother Thetis that he prays, 
his mother Thetis that helps him. And few beings even in the 
iad have the magic of that sea-spirit, so unearthly and yet 
so tender. 

No. Do not let us condemn too carelessly the home of the 


80 THE RISE OF THE -GREEKVEFIC ΠῚ 


pre-Hellenic peoples which knew of mothers and children, but 
not much of husbands. Both forms of home must have acted as 
powerful moral influences in man’s life before the time of the 
migrations by sea, and both equally were destroyed at that time, 
and their divers ties and tendernesses battered out of existence. 
‘As for this trouble about Briseis,’ says Agamemnon to the 
envoys, ‘tell Achilles that I will give him seven Lesbian women 
down, and I promise him that, when we take Troy, he can pick 
out twenty Trojan women—any twenty excluding Helen.’ And 
Briseis herself has not a proper name. The word Briseis is only 
an adjective derived from the town of Brisa or Brésa in Lesbos, 
She is ‘ the girl from Brésa’. 

So much for the respect for woman which forms a part of the 
tradition of both forms of home. And what of the father? It 
is interesting, though not strange, how keenly this question of 
the treatment of fathers is felt. It was the same in the early 
Aryan household, and throughout historical Greece. It is the 
same, I should imagine, in all societies except those in which 
people, like the rich at the present day, live on incomes derived 
_ from accumulated stores of wealth and are consequently far 
removed from the groundwork of human needs. In all poor or 
precarious societies there is an assumption that the children owe 
the parents a definite debt for their food and rearing. The 
parents fed and protected the child when he was helpless. Now 
that the old man cannot fight, the son must fight for him: when 
he cannot work, the son must support him. Yet when men are 
flying or fighting for their lives, when every weak hand or slow 
foot brings danger to the whole party, there must have been 
many old men left by their sons to save themselves as best they 
might. The conscience of the Greek Saga was stirred on the 
point. Not without purpose does it tell us how Aeneas in the 
very flames of Troy, when every delay might mean death, would 
not move without ‘ father Anchises’, and, when Anchises’ strength 
failed, faced all the dangers of flight amid armed enemies with 
the old man upon his back. That is what the saga calls ‘ piety’! 
It is the other side of Hesiod’s complaint, how the men of those 
days, the generations that came just after the Trojan War, cursed 
and deserted their old parents. 

For there is a passage in Hesiod which reads almost as if it 


ΠῚ HESIOD’S IRON AGE 81 


were a direct description of this period of the Migrations, the 
time when all the old sanctions which guided life have been 
broken by the stress of a too great trouble. The passage comes 
with an effect of interruption in the midst of the story of the Four 
Ages of Man, the Golden, Silver, Bronzen, and Iron. Four they 
must of course have been: but, as the poem now stands, there 
comes a curious break after the Bronzen Men. They are 
followed by the Heroes who fought at Thebes and Troy, and 
they by the Iron race. This looks as if the Heroes were a mere 
interpolation, and with the Iron Men we returned to the original 
story. But the description of the Iron Men is in a style different 
from that of the two earlier races. The Iron Men are not 
creatures of mere idyllic badness. Through the dimness of the 
half-childish story, through the formality of the stiffly poeticized 
language, one feels something of the grit of real life. And it is 
a life very like that which we have just been analysing: the 
homeless, godless struggle of the last migration. And it is as- 
cribed to just the same point of history, the Dark Age which 
followed μετὰ τὰ Τρωικά, after the fall of Thebes, Troy, and 
Mycenae (£rga, 156 ff.).! 
But when the Earth had covered away this race also, then 
Zeus son of Cronos made yet a fourth upon the land, more 
righteous and valiant: the divine generation of the Heroes, 
which are called half-gods of early times over the boundless 
world. Bad war and awful battle slew them all; some at 
Seven-Gated Thebes, the land of the Cadmeans, died 
battling about the flocks of the son of Oedipus: and some 
War took in ships over the great gulf of the sea to Troy-land 
for the sake of fair-haired Helen. Where verily the end of 
death clouded them round. 


And father Zeus, son of Cronos, gave them a life and 
familiar places far away from men, settling them at the ends 


1 It is almost impossible to date the subject-matter of a given part of the 
Erga. As we have them, they represent early material, Boeotian, Phocian, 
and other, in a late Ionized form. See on this point "Lectures IV and V 
below. The story of the Four Ages is probably of dateless antiquity ; the 
addition of the Heroes and the re-shaping of the Iron Men may possibly have 
been originally made in Ionia and afterwards taken over into the poetry 
of the mainland. But the passing of the Arnaioi, Minyai, Lapithai, fragments 
of Thracians and Phrygians, &c. through Boeotia, would produce equally 
well the condition here described ; and it is simplest to suppose that the 
whole passage, re-shaping and all, is Boeotian or Phocian, The Dark Age 
affected the whole of Greece. 


2760 G 


82 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC ΠῚ 


of the world, far from the immortals, and Cronos is king 
among them. And there they live with hearts untormented, 
in the Islands of the Blessed, beside deep eddying ocean, 
happy Heroes, and the mother of corn bears to them thrice 
in the year her honey-sweet harvests. 

Then the Fifth Men—would that I had never been among 
them, but either had died before or been born after! For 
now is a race of iron. And never by day shall they have 
rest from labour and anguish, nor by night from the spoiler. 
The gods shall fill them with hard cares.... The father no 
more kind to his children, nor the children to their father, 
nor the guest true to the host that shelters him, nor comrade 
to comrade: the brother no more dear to his brother, as in 
the old days. Parents shall grow old quickly and be 
despised, and will turn on their children with a noise of 
bitter words. Woe upon them: and they hear no more the 
voice of their gods! They will pay not back to their 
parents in old age the guerdon of their feeding in childhood. 
Their righteousness in their fists! And a man shall sack 
his brother’s walled city. 

There shall no more joy be taken in the faithful man nor 
the righteous nor the good: they shall honour rather the 
doer of evils and violence. . . .There shall be a spirit of 
striving among miserable men, a spirit ugly-voiced, glad of 
evil, with hateful eyes. 


A spirit of striving, I have called it: the Greek is ξῆλος, envy, 
competition, the struggle for life. But observe that the end is not 
yet ; though all normal sanctions have failed, the men of the Fifth 
Age have still something to lose: 


Then at the last, up to Olympus from the wide-wayed 
earth, the beautiful faces hidden in white veils, away to the 
tribe of the immortals, forsaking man, shall depart Azdds 
and Nemeszs.} 


How shall we attempt to translate the beautiful words? ‘ Ruth 


1 There are interesting imitations of this passage in Eur. JZedea, 439 ff. : 
βέβακε δ᾽ ὅρκων χάρις, οὐδ᾽ ἔτ᾽ Αἰδὼς Ἑλλάδι τᾷ μεγάλᾷ μένει, αἰθερία δ᾽ ἀνέπτα. 
Also in the new (1911) papyrus of the Cynic poet Kerkidas: “Api δὲ Παιὰν 
kat per Αἰδὼς ἀγαθὰ μελέτω: θεὸς yap αὕτα καὶ Νέμεσις κατὰ γᾶν. (‘Paian’ 
here is the ‘Healer’ of sick humanity.)—Nemesis appears elsewhere as a 
form of Artemis and as the Koré of Rhamniis, and Mr. A. B. Cook 
makes the very interesting suggestion that Νέμεσις is to νέμος as Adxeots to 
λάχος. Nemesis is thus like the Celtic Memmefona, from memeton, a sacred 
wood, or the Latin Diana Nemorensis. Her statue at Rhamnis had stags 
in its crown and an apple-branch in its left hand, (Paus. i. 33. 3.) See 
Appendix D. . 


ΠῚ AIDOS AND NEMESIS 83 


and Wrath’ might serve. But let that pass for the moment. 
The time which the prophet feared never came. Those two 
goddesses stayed with man in his loneliest and worst hour, and 
provided, if I read the history aright, the most vital force in the 
shaping of later Greek ethics and poetry. A full understanding 
of the word Azdos would take one very far towards the under- 
standing of all the hopes and creations of the Greek poets. 


Aidés is usually translated ‘Shame’ or ‘Sense of Honour’, 
and Νέμεσις, by an awkward though correct phrase, ‘ Righteous 
Indignation.’ The great characteristic of both these principles, 
as of Honour generally, is that they only come into operation 
when a man is free: when there is no compulsion. If you take 
people such as these of the Fifth Age, who have broken away 
from all their old sanctions, and select among them some strong 
and turbulent chief who fears no one, you will first think that 
such a man is free to do whatever enters his head. And then, 
as a matter of fact, you find that amid his lawlessness there will 
crop up some possible action which somehow makes him feel 
uncomfortable. If he has done it, he ‘rues’ the deed and is 
haunted by it. If he has not done it, he ‘ shrinks’ from doing it. 
And this, not because any one forces him, nor yet because any 
particular result will accrue to him afterwards, But simply 
because he feels aidds. No one can tell where the exact point of 
honour will arise. When Achilles fought against Eétion’s city, 
‘he sacked all the happy city of the Cilician men, high-gated 
Thébé, and slew Eétion: but he spoiled him not of his armour. 
He had azdés in his heart for that ; but he burned him there as 
he lay in his rich-wrought armour, and heaped a mound above 
him. And all around him there grew elm-trees, planted by the 
Mountain Spirits, daughters of Aegis-bearing Zeus.’! That is 
aidds pure and clean, and the latter lines ring with the peculiar 
tenderness of it. Achilles had nothing to gain, nothing to lose. 
Nobody would have said a word if he had taken Eétion’s richly- 
wrought armour. It would have been quite the natural thing to 
do. But he happened to feel aidds about it. 

Aidos is what you feel about an act of your own: Nemesis is 
what you feel for the act of another. Or, most often, it is what 


1 Z 417. The word used is σέβας, not αἰδώς : but in the connexion it comes 
to the same. 


2 


34 THE ‘RISE ΟΕ THE ΘΚ ΕΚ ἘΡΙΓς ΠῚ 


you imagine that others will feelabout you. If you feel disposed 
to run away in battle, think of the νέμεσις ἀνθρώπων! People 
will put that act to your account. When the elders of Troy look 
upon Helen, ‘ Well, they say, ‘if men fight and die for such 
a woman as that, οὐ νέμεσις : none can blame them’ (Γ΄ 156). 
Helen herself when she is expected—of course by a goddess: 
no human being would be so shameless—to go to Paris and let 
him make love to her immediately after he has emerged with 
doubtful honour from his battle with Menelaus, refuses roundly : 
‘TI will not go: νεμεσσητὸν δέ κεν ein—it would be a thing to 
feel nemesis at’ (Γ 410). When Achilles is justly angered with 
Agamemnon, at first none can blame him (I 523): but if he 
persists after Agamemnon has sued for forgiveness, then there 
will be nemesis: people will be indignant. He will know he is 
doing wrong. (Observe, of course, that Nemesis does not mean 
Retribution.) 

Let us follow this spirit of Nemesis for a moment, and then 
return after wards to her still more interesting companion. Inthe 
above instances the nemesis, the ‘ wrath’ or righteous indigna- 
tion, has been that of definite witnesses or associates. There are 
people who have seen your act, and know. But suppose no 
one sees. The act, as you know well, remains νεμεσητόν--- 
a thing to feel nemesis about: only there is no one there to feel 
it. Yet, if you yourself dislike what you have done and feel 
aidds for it, you inevitably are conscious that somebody or some- 
thing dislikes or disapproves of you. You do not look at the 
sun and the earth with peace and friendliness. Now, to an early 
Greek, the earth, water, and air were full of living eyes: of theoz, 
of datmones, of kéres. To Hesiod and Homer they are‘ myriads, 
from whom there is no escape nor hiding’. One early poet? 
says emphatically that the air is so crowded full of them that 
there is no room to put in the spike of an ear of corn without 
touching one. And it is they who have seen you and are 
wroth with you for the thing which you have done! 

The word (Vemeszs very soon passes away from the sphere of 
definite human blame. Coarser and more concrete words are 


* ἀμφὶ δὲ κῆρες | εἰλεῦνται, κενεὴ δ᾽ εἴσδυσις οὐδ᾽ αἰθέρι, Bergk, 27. adesp. 2 B, 
reading ἀθέρι, as is shown to be right by the quotation in Aeneas of Gaza 
(p. 399 E).—See J. E. Harrison, Prolegomena, p. 170, note. 


Il ACTIONS THAT CAUSE AIDOS 85 


used for that: ὀνείδεα, ψόγοι. Nemesis is the haunting impal- 
pable wrath of the Earth and Sun, the Air, the Gods, the Dead. 
Observe, it is not the direct anger of the injured person: it is 
the blame of the third person who saw. 

Now let us be clear about one point. You will sometimes find 
writers who ought to know better expressing themselves about 
these matters in a misleading way. They say, or imply, that 
when a Greek spared an enemy he did not do it from merciful- 
ness or honour as we understand the words, but because it was 
a part of his religion that Zeus would have a grudge against him 
and punish him if he did otherwise. This may be true of a given 
superstitious individual. But as regards the race it is putting the 
effect for the cause. It was the emotion of the race that first 
created the religious belief. If the early Greeks believed that 
Zeus hated the man who wronged a suppliant, that belief was 
not based on any observed behaviour on the part of Zeus. It 
was merely that they themselves hated the man who did so, and 
felt that their god must hate him. 

There are, then, certain actions which cause the feelings of 
aidés and nemesis, of shame or ruth, when a man thinks of doing 
them himself, of righteous indignation when he sees them done 
by others. Let us notice more closely what these actions 
generally are. How far, for instance, do they coincide with the 
objects of our own, or the mediaeval, feeling of ‘honour’? First 
and most obvious, there are the actions that imply cowardice : 
they bring the simplest and crudest shame : ‘ Aidds, O ye Argives, 
will ye not stand?’ ‘Put in your hearts aidds and nemesis, ... 
I would not rail against one that was a weakling, for holding 
back in battle: but you are chieftains! ... I have nemesis against 
you in my heart’ (N 95 ff.). 

Secondly, actions that imply falseness: lying and perjury. I 
doubt if the word ever occurs in this sense in Homer, but that is 
because questions of false swearing never arise among Homeric 
heroes. The false stories told by Odysseus in the Odyssey are 
merely ruses of war. The treason of Pandaros is something 
which that unfortunate person might have felt shame for had he 
lived. The poet himself seems a little ashamed of mentioning 
such behaviour on the part of a hero, even a hostile hero, and 
arranges as usual to lay the real guilt upon a god. Homeric 


&6 THE 'RISE OF ΤΗΝ GREEK EPIC ΤΠ 


heroes do not need the aidds which prevents or ‘ rues’ falseness. 
But it is common enough in Hesiod and Theognis and in tragedy. 

Thirdly, actions that imply what we may loosely term im- 
pudence or lack of reverence. The cases are few: Helen’s words 
above quoted are in point. So no doubt would be the boldness 
of Niobé in boasting herself against the goddess Leto (2 602 ff.), 
or the impudence of Thersites in the second book of the Ziad. 

All these might be included as objects of any current concep- 
tion of ‘Honour’: but there is a fourth sense, by far the most 
widespread and significant, which reaches a good deal beyond 
the ordinary mediaeval ideal. It is the horror of cruelty or 
treachery towards the helpless. Any sympathetic reader of 
early Greek poetry will have noticed the importance, or indeed 
the sanctity, attached to three classes of human beings: strangers, 
suppliants, and old people. What is there in common between 
the three? Nothing, I think, but their helplessness. Realize 
what a stranger is, in a primitive society. He is a man with no 
home, no friends, no one to protect him from injury, no one to 
avenge him afterwards. He has not even his own sanctuaries to 
shelter him, or his own tribal god. And again, a suppliant : 
a suppliant is any man or woman who formally casts away all 
means of self-defence and throws himself upon your mercy. 
That is the essential thing ; though of course, when he could, the 
helpless man tried to influence your feelings in divers other 
ways. He associated himself with something that you held 
sacred. He sat on the steps of an altar: he touched some sacred 
object : he lay on your door-step and threatened to starve unless 
you took him in; he contrived with his hand to touch your face 
or your beard. But those are all accessories. The essential is 
confessed helplessness. And all their literature shows what 
horror the early Greeks felt at the notion of definitely and 
formally rejecting a prayer made by the helpless, a horror some- 
times amounting to what we should call moral weakness. They 
expressed this generally in theological language. ‘ The stranger 
and the suppliant come from Zeus.’ ‘Zeus is the watcher of 
stranger and suppliant’ (¢ 270); ‘The very Thunderer follows 
the aidoios ἱκέτης (n 165, 181); his own titles are Ἱκετήσιος 
and Ἐείΐνιος and even ’Adixrop.' 


1 On Ζεὺς ᾿Αφίκτωρ, see Lecture XI, p. 275. 


ΠῚ PERSONS WHO CAUSE AIDOS 87 


And thirdly, old people. Here there enters in, no doubt, 
some element of the patriarchal sanctity of a father; but I think . 
that the helplessness of age is again the main reason for an old 
man or woman being aidotos. That explains why they are, like 
beggars, strangers, suppliants, especially under the guardianship 
of the gods, and in particular of Zeus. It explains why the older 
they are the more is their claim on Aid6ds: why the blind are 
classed with them.! It may.be objected that, if helplessness is 
the criterion, children also would be αἰδοῖοι. The answer is 
᾿ interesting. Ordinary children are not specially αἰδοῖοι, or 
charged with sanctity, because they have their grown-up relations 
to protect them. But orphan children are. 

There are some five deadly sins, says Hesiod in the Evga, of 
which you cannot say that one is worse than another. They 
are all beyond the pale (Z7ga, 327 ff.) : 

It is all as one thing—the man who does evil to 
a suppliant and to a stranger; the man who goeth into his 
brother’s bed; the man who in heartlessness sins against 
orphan children ; the man who reviles his old father on the 


bitter threshold of age, laying hold of him with hurting 
words: with that man Zeus himself is wroth. 


These sins consist of four offences against the helpless and one 
breach of a fundamental family ¢adoo0. All adultery was a most 
grave offence. But if this particular form of it is chosen as the 
worst, that is the doing of Aidds. Your brother trusts you, and 
is often at your mercy. That is what makes him sacred. 

For apart from any question of wrong acts done to them, there 
are certain classes of people more αἰδοῖοι, objects of aidés, than 
others. There are people in whose presence a man feels shame, 
self-consciousness, awe, a sense keener than usual of the im- 
portance of behaving well. And what sort of people chiefly 
excite this aids? Of course there are kings, elders and sages, 
princes and ambassadors: αἰδοῖοι βασιλῆες, γέροντες, and the 
like: all of them people for whom you naturally feel reverence, 
and whose good or bad opinion is important in the world. Yet, 


τ Cf. Soph. O. 7. 374-7, where commentators, from not seeing this point, 
have altered the text. Qed. ‘Thou art a child of unbroken night, so that 
neither I nor any other who sees the light would (ἂν) ever harm thee” 777. 
‘It is not my doom to fall by thy hand,’ ἄς, So MSS., and cf. 448 below, 
where Tiresias repeats the same statement. 


88 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC III 


if you notice the language of early Greek poetry, you will find 
that it is not these people, but quite others, who are most deeply 
charged, as it were, with aidés ; before whom you feel still more 
keenly conscious of your unworthiness, and whose good or ill 
opinion weighs somehow inexplicably more in the last account. 
The disinherited of the earth, the injured, the helpless, and 
among them the most utterly helpless of all, the dead.’ All 
these, the dead, the stranger, the beggar, the orphan, the merely 
unhappy, are from the outset αἰδοῖοι, ‘charged with αἰδώς." 
Wrong them, and they become, z24s0_/acfo and without any word 
of their own, ἀραΐοι or προστρόπαιοι, incarnate curses, things 
charged with the wrath of God.” 

The feeling seems to have been very strong. One must bring 
it into connexion with the various stories of gods who were dis- 
guised as beggars, and went through the world ill or well entreated 
by different men according to their different natures. It is the 
counterpart of what we, in our modern and scientific prose, call 
‘a sense of social responsibility’ or the like; the feeling roused 
more or less in most people by the existence of great misery in 
our wealthy societies. ΤῸ the Greek poet it was hot scientific, 
and it was not prose. It was an emotion, the keener because it 
was merely instinctive and was felt by a peculiarly sensitive people ; 
an emotion of shame and awe, and perhaps something like guilt, 
in meeting the eyes of the oppressed of the earth; a feeling that 

1 “Do you feel aidés for the dead body of one that hated you?’ the wise 
Odysseus is asked in the Ajax; ‘ His goodness is more to me than his hate’ 
is the answer, an answer full of aidos (Ajax, 1357). ‘ The stranger and the 
beggar are charged with aidés, says Eumaeus in the Odyssey, and the 
adjective αἰδοῖος is a regular epithet of a stranger. But mere unhappiness 


is enough: ‘A miserable man must needs rouse aidés in you,’ says Oedipus 
(OG. 247): 

Προστρόπαιος is not ‘turning oneself towards’, as L. and S. say: it is 
the adjective from προστροπή which is the opposite of ἀποτροπή, ‘ aversion.’ 
As you can by sacrifice, &c., try to ‘avert’ the δαίμονας so you can ‘bring 
them upon’ somebody. Thus an injured suppliant has a power of προστροπή: 
he drings down the gods upon his injurer. A criminal brings them down on 
himself and those who are infected by his dyos. These words are very often 
misunderstood ; e.g. the φθόγγον “ἀραϊον οἴκοις of Iphigenia (4g. 237) was not 
a spoken curse—which would make the passage hideous—but the mere 
crying of a murdered daughter, which necessarily involves an apd. So when 
Philoctetes charges Neoptolemus to look him in the face: τὸν προστρόπαιον, 
τὸν ἱκέτην, ὦ σχέτλιε; he means: ‘ Me, charged with the wrath of God ; me, 
who kneel before thee, O hard heart’ (P%z/. 930).—I do not mean to deny 


that you can say in Greek τραπέσθαι ἐπὶ or πρὸς ἑστίαν. Aesch. Cho. 1038, 
Eum, 205. 


ΠῚ LATER HISTORY OF AIDOS 89 


a wrong done to these men is like no other wrong; that what 
these men report of you ultimately in the ear of Zeus will outweigh 
all the acute comments of the world and the gratifying reports of 
your official superiors, 


If you look into the history of later Greek Ethics, it is rather 
a surprise to find how small a place is occupied by Aidos. 
Even to Plato and Aristotle it has become little more than an 
amiable quality, the absence of which is particularly repulsive. 
It has quite ceased to be the guiding force of men’s moral life. 
These two philosophers, of course, belong to a particular school : 
they are aristocratic and intellectual; both perhaps too much 
inclined to despise those emotions which appeal to man’s simplest 
instincts and have a touch of the animal in them. If we possessed 
any complete books by the more democratic and less authoritarian 
philosophers, by Protagoras especially and Democritus, our im- 
pression might be different. Among the philosophers of the 
Roman period Aidés has quite faded away. It plays no part in 
Epictetus. It is barely mentioned by Sextus Empiricus. Only 
Kerkidas the Cynic, rejector of all organization and system and 
convention, falls back to primitive feelings and asks that life shall 
be guided by Paian—the Healer—and Aidés. One can see the 
reason for this; indeed, the many reasons. 

For one thing, Aidés is a mere emotion, and therefore incalcul- 
able, arbitrary, devoid of principle. A man may happen not to 
feel the emotion, and then you have nothing to appeal to. Or 
again, if he has the emotion, there is no way of judging its strength. 
An emotion which is made the whole moving principle of conduct 
grows with what it feeds upon: it is never sated: it moves towards 

* I have sometimes wondered how it happens that slaves are never spoken 
of as charged with azdés. A particular slave may be treated with azdés. 
He may be protected and helped because he is a stranger or a beggar. But 
the word is not regularly applied to a slave. I think the reason is, as 
Euripides says, ‘Why speak of ruth where ruthlessness is the law?’ The 
whole institution was a negation of Aidés; a refusal to listen to the emotion 
in question. If you made a man your slave, that showed you did not regard 
him with aidés. So the less said about it the better. As the Ocean Spirits 
in the Prometheus tell us—with a different meaning—the clank of the 
riveting of a prisoner’s fetters frightens Aidés away (Prom. 134). Of course 
a wrong done to a slave was hated by the gods and, one might hope, duly 
avenged. But that was the same with animals. Εἰσὶ καὶ κυνῶν €pwves—there 


is vengeance in heaven for an injured dog. On the ramifications and possible 
origin of Aidas, Δίκη, Ὅρκος, &c., see Appendix Ὁ. 


go THE “RISE OF) THE GREBK (EPIC Ill 


the infinite. That way madness lies, as the lives of so many of 
the saints have shown us. Besides, behind any morality based 
upon emotion there is the question whether you ought or ought 
not in a particular case to feel the emotion: and if not, why not ? 
It is there that the real principle of Ethics comes in. The later 
philosophers wanted to understand, not merely to feel. They had 
to build up conduct into a consistent rational system. It would 
help them little if nren said, ‘ Follow the leading of Aidés,’ ‘ Love 
your neighbour,’ ‘ Pity humanity.’ Such rules will help the con- 
duct of men. But they do not provide an answer to a speculative 
problem. Perhaps the main ‘thing which the philosophers got 
from Aid6s was Aristotle’s doctrine of the Mean: the observation 
that in any emotion or any movement there is a possible best 
point, which you should strive to attain and shrink from passing. 
A great liberating doctrine, no doubt ; but one with the emotion 
all gone from it. That was what served Aristotle’s purpose best. 

Again, there is an historical reason for the decline in the im- 
portance of Aiddés, Aidos, like Honour, is essentially the virtue 
of a wild and ill-governed society, where there is not much 
effective regulation of men’s actions by the law. [{ is essentially 
the thing that is left when all other sanctions fail; the last of the 
immortals to leave a distracted world. In an ordered society 
there are all the more concrete sanctions to appeal to—the police, 
the law, organized public opinion. 

In a well-organized society the great majority of men are under 
compulsion to behave better than they naturally would, if left to 
themselves. It often strikes me, in certain parts of early Greek 
poetry, that one gets a glimpse of a society in which, by the 
breaking up of ordered life, men were compelled to be worse than 
nature intended ; where good and merciful men had to do things 
which they hated afterwards to remember. One may recall the 
character in Herodotus,! who wished to be the most righteous 
man in the world, but was not permitted by circumstances. As 
a rule in fiction (where motives of flattery cannot come into play) 
rich men are wicked. It is obviously more interesting, as well as 
more gratifying to the reader’s feelings, to make them so. But 
in Homer the rich men are apt to be specially virtuous; ἀφνειὸς 
ἀμύμων, ‘rich and blameless’ (E 9). One is reminded of the 

> Herodotus, iii. 142. 


ΤΠ ROMAN AND GREEK ΟΙ 


naive desire of the old poet Phokylides, first to acquire a com- 
petence and then to practise virtue. The project is amusing to 
us, as it was to Plato. We know so much of the result of that 
scheme of life. Yet think of that son of Teuthrasin the 7Zad, who 
‘dwelt behind the strong walls of Arisbé, rich in all livelihood, 
and was beloved of men. For he built his dwelling by the road- 
side and showed love to all who passed.’! One might almost 
think that, like Phokylides, he had made some resolution to 
‘practise virtue’ in this way, feeding the hungry and washing 
the feet of strangers. But, in any case, it is easy to imagine how, 
ina time like that of the Migrations, a decent man who had passed 
through the horrid necessities of the struggle for bare life, and 
was at last safe and prosperous with a strong wall around him, 
would become just like these rich men in Homer, thankful to live 
at last blameless and gentle towards gods and men. 

The suggestion is little more than a fancy. But it occurs to 
me in connexion with another. When wecompare the civilization 
and character of Greece and of Rome, we are struck, among 
many other differences, with some broad general divergence. 
The Roman seems to have all the faults and the virtues of 
successful men. He is severe, strong, well-disciplined, trust- 
worthy, self-confident, self-righteous, unimaginative, a heavy 
feeder, a lover of gladiatorial games. The Greek, less gregarious, 
less to be relied upon, more swept by impulse; now dying 
heroically for lost causes; now, at the very edge of heroism, 
swept by panic and escaping with disgrace; capable of bitter 
hatreds and massacres in hot blood, of passionate desires and 
occasional orgies; but instinctively hating cruelty, revolting from 
the Roman shows, frugal, simple and hardy to a degree which we 
can with difficulty realize : above all, possessed of an unusual power 
of seeing beyond himself and of understanding his enemies ; caring 
for intellect, imagination, freedom, beauty, more than for force 
and organization, crying aloud for orderliness and symmetry, in 
part from mere artistic sense, in part because he knew his own 
needs and dangers; much as Plato prayed to be delivered from 
poetry because poetry was to him a seducing fire. The causes 
of such a difference are innumerable. There may have been a 
greater proportion of pre-Aryan elements in Greek civilization. 

EB ts. 


92 THE RISE OF THE ‘GREEK EPIC ΠῚ 


There were important geographical differences. But one cause, 
I think, is the early experience of the Greek race during the 
great sea-migrations. The Romans had an almost steady history 
of stern discipline, of conquest and well-earned success: the 
Greeks at the beginning of their history passed through the very 
fires of hell. They knew, what Rome as a whole did not know, 
the inward meaning and the reverse side of glory. They knew 
the bitterness of lost battles, the sting of the master’s lash; they 
knew self-judgement and self-contempt, amazement and despair. 
They had their triumphs and conquests. They must, I suppose, 
be counted, even politically, among the most successful races of 
mankind. But in their highest successes, in the times both of 
Pericles and of Alexander, there is always something daring and 
precarious. Their armies are always fighting against odds ; their 
little cities trying by sheer energy and intellect to stem the strength 
of great military empires. It is a wondrous fabric held together 
for an hour by some splendid grasp of human genius, not one 
based on strong material foundations by the gregarious and half- 
conscious efforts of average men. They began their life as a 
people, it would seem, in a world where palaces and temples 
were shattered, armies overthrown, laws and familiar gods brought 
to oblivion. Perforce they questioned and they wondered. It 
is not for nothing that Greece produced Heraclitus and Plato, 
thinking that all things pass like a stream and that the idea is 
the only abiding reality. Thus, like the prophet in Callimachus’ 
great poem, they saw early the world that is behind the ordinary 
world of human strivings, more real and more intangible; and 
throughout their history somehow this ideal haunted the race, a 
vision perturbing their sight, unfitting them for continued empire, 
yet shedding strangely over their defeat a splendour denied to 
their conquerors.’ 


1 Call. Lavacra Palladis 87 τέκνον ἄλαστε, | εἶδες ᾿Αθαναίας στάθεα καὶ 
, > >? > 3.“ , wa 
λαγόνας, | GAN οὐκ ἀέλιον πάλιν ὄψεαι. 


IV 
AN ANCIENT TRADITIONAL BOOK 


50 far we have been considering the people: I wish now 
to turn to the literature. For one of the clearest facts that we 
know about these driven fragments of society who form the soil 
from which Hellenism sprang is that they must have had a 
literature. The vast store of prehistoric tradition preserved in 
the Greek heroic saga is evidence enough. The Northerners 
can scarcely have known the art of writing before some few of 
them learned it in Greece. But it is quite conceivable that in 
very early times they possessed epic lays, and that these lays 
were in dactylic verse. So much we can conclude from various 
formulae imbedded in the Homeric language. On the other side, 
the Cretan script, coming on the top of other evidence which 
was already sufficient, shows that long before the Migrations 
there were scribes and ‘wise men’ in the Aegean who had the 
power of writing. 

I am not proposing to discuss the Homeric Question, but rather 
to put forward some general considerations preliminary to the 
Homeric Question. If the men of the Migrations possessed a 
literature, that literature was not in the least what we mean by 
‘Homer’, viz. the Τα and the Odyssey. It was not even what 
the Greeks of the sixth and early fifth centuries meant by ‘ Homer’, 
viz. the whole body of heroic tradition as embodied in hexameter 
verse.’ It must really have been something far more primitive 
and less differentiated, of which the didactic epos, the lists of 
ancestors, the Stesichorean lyrics, the local chronicles, the theo- 
logical, magical, and philosophical writings, as well as the heroic 
poems, are so many specialized developments. It has long been 
clear to students of early Greece that the Zéad and Odyssey are 
not primitive poems. Not only their art and construction, but 


* See Wilamowitz, Homerische Untersuchungen, pp. 329-80. 


94 THE. RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC IV 


their whole outlook on the world and the gods is far removed 
from that of the most primitive Greeks known to us. Both 
poems, indeed, contain a great deal of extremely ancient matter: 
but both, as they stand, are the products of a civilized age and a 
long process of development. It is the beginnings of literature 
that we are now considering. 

Let us begin by trying to imagine the position and practice in 
an early society, say in Ionia before Thales, or on the mainland 
before Solon, of what the Greeks generally described as a λόγιος 
ἀνήρ, or ‘man of words’! I say ‘words’ because I despair of 
an adequate translation of Zogoz. The conception Logos, ‘ word’ 
or ‘speech’, had, as we all know, a peculiarly distinguished 
history among the Greeks. It was the word spoken: it was the 
power of language; it was the word which implies reason, 
persuasion, interpretation, and which settles differences instead 
of the armed hand; it was thus the word which mediates between 
the soul of man and man, or, in theological language, between 
man and God; to the philosopher it was the silent but eternal 
word upon the lips 6f Nature, the speech by which the Cosmos 
expressed its inborn reason. But for our present purpose it is 
another aspect of the Logos that comes into play. The Logzos 
A nér, or Man of Words, was the man who possessed the Things 
Said, or traditions, which made up the main sum of man’s 
knowledge. He knew what Logoi really existed, and what were 
mere inventions or mistakes. He could say λόγος ἐστίν," much 
as a Hebrew could say ‘It is written’. This implies, what is of 
course the case, that Greek saga was mainly preserved by oral 
tradition.’ Yet it would be rash to assume that there were no 
writings. The extant Cretan records are far earlier than any 
possible Homer. The ancients themselves tell stories of the 
‘books’ of the early minstrels. The use of MSS. by the 
composers of our J/vad and Odyssey seems almost as certain as 


1 See also Prof. Butcher’s Lecture on ‘ The Written and the Spoken Word’ 
in Some Aspects of the Greek Genius. 

? Ar. Frogs, 1052: ‘What I said about Phaedra, was it not an dv Adyos?’ 

5.1 see that Drerup has mistaken my meaning, Omero, Ὁ. 68, note. I 
discuss the books because they are there to discuss; the oral tradition in each 
case was more important, as I explain, but it has vanished. The MSS. of 
the Roland still exist, but no one living can hear ‘Thorold’ or Taillefer 
improvising. See the excellent remarks of F. Bolte on Rhapsodische Vor- 
tragskunst in Neue Jahrbucher, 1907, 1. Abt. xix. 8, 


ee 


IV AN ANCIENT BOOK 95 


such things can be, and, though those composers themselves 
belong to a much later date, the fragments of minute and, we 
may add, uninteresting history preserved in the epic suggest the 
use of some surer and more positive method than mere oral 
tradition. The Man of Words, we may assume, would in many 
cases not trust entirely to his memory, but would make a 
permanent Logos of his own in the shape of a book.! 


A book in those days was not what it is now. It was not 
a thing to be given to the public, not a thing to be read 
for pleasure.” One- can find parallels in the East or in the 
Middle Ages. There was the great book of Michael Scott, the 
magician, which was read by no man but one, and was 
buried in its master’s grave. There was the book of Thoth, 
carried off by Nefrekepta; the Book of Catyllus, reported by 
the Spanish Mandeville.? There is the great list of Arabic 
chronicles, the rule of which is that each chronicle was the 
property of the author or of his heir, and could not be read by 
others without his permission. There are the innumerable and 


* Mr. Lang suggested to me the comparison of the Gaelic ‘sennachie’: 
‘sean’ = old; ‘seanachas’ = story, tradition; ‘seanachaidh’ (pronounced 
*shen-ach-ay’) = a man of tales, historian. It seems quite clear that the 
sennachies could not read or write. 

? All through antiquity a book remained a thing to be recited from, or to 
be read aloud to an audience by a skilled person. It is partly due to facts 
like this that the oral repetition of stories continued so extremely late in 
human history to be the normal way of keeping alive the records of the past, 
even if the past was vitally important. In the case of the Gospels, for 
instance, where a modern would have considered it of absolutely overwhelm- 
ing importance to have a written record as soon as possible of the exact 
deeds and sayings of the Master, we find, as a matter of fact, that it was left 
for a considerable time to oral tradition. Compare the well-known phrase of 
Papias (died c, A.D. 135), deliberately preferring a third-hand oral report to 
the written word :— 

‘Whenever any person came my way, who had been a follower of the 
Elders, I would inquire about the discourses of those elders, what was said 
by Andrew or by Peter or by Philip or by Thomas or James, or by John or 
Matthew or any other of the Lord’s disciples, or what Aristion and the Elder 
John, disciples of the Lord, said. For I did not think I could get so much 
profit from the contents of books as from the utterings of a living and abiding 
voice.’ (I cite from Estlin Carpenter’s Hirst Three Gospels, p. 4.) 

In the time of Papias there were libraries with books by the hundred 
thousand, yet a book is still to him a dead and troublesome mode of com- 
munication. He is said to have been rather a stupid man, πάνυ σμικρὸς τὸν 
νοῦν. But a thousand years earlier than Papias this attitude of mind was the 
normal one. 

* Griffith’s Stories of the High Priests of Memphis; Spanish Mandeville, 
fol. 1376. (I owe this reference to Mr, W. R, Halliday.) 


Eo 


96 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC IV 


constantly varying MSS. of stories like the drabzan Nights, 
each copy originally meant to be the private stock-in-trade of a 
professional story-teller. In all these cases the man lived by his 
book. It must be kept from the public; above all, it must be 
kept from the eyes of professional rivals. It can be given or 
bequeathed to a son or a favourite disciple, as in the Greek story 
one of Homer’s scrolls, the ‘Cypria’, served as his daughter’s 
dowry, another, the ‘ Taking of Oechalia’, was left to his heir, 
Creophylus.1. For the ancient Man of Words was not exactly a 
story-teller, not exactly a chronicler, not exactly a magician. 
He was all three, and something more also. His Logos con- 
tained, with no distinction of subject, all that he specially wanted 
not to forget, or, at least, all that was worth the immense trouble 
of writing down, letter by letter. 

There was an ancient Greek tradition, superseded in general 
by the Cadmus story, which somehow connected the invention 
of writing with Orpheus and the Muses. Orpheus’ voice seems 
to have recorded itself in books in some mysterious way.2. And 
the Greek bards always owe, not only what we should call their 
inspiration, but their actual knowledge of facts to the Muses. 
The Muses ‘are present and know all things’. They are, to 
Hesiod at least, ‘the daughters of Memory.’* Hesiod professes, 
roughly speaking, to be able to sing about everything ; but he 
always explains that he is dependent on the Muses for his know- 
ledge. Other sources of knowledge are indeed recognized. When 
giving the names of all the rivers in the world, Hesiod stops at a 
certain point and says that for the names of the rest you had better 
consult the people who live on their banks, and they will be able 
to tell you (7eog. 370). But most often he consults the Muses 
(Theog. τ ff., 105 ff., 966, 1022, Catalogues). So does Homer for 
such subjects as the Catalogue of the Greek army (cf. a 7, B 486, 
761, cf. M 176). One suspects that that consultation was often 


1 Cf. the case of Jendeus de Brie, author of the Batazlle Loguifer, cent. 
xii: he ‘wrote the poem, kept it carefully, taught it to no man, and made 
much gain out of it in Sicily where he sojourned, and left it to his son when 
he died’. Similar statements are made about Huon de Villeneuve, who 
would not part from his poem for horses or furs or for any price, and about 
other poets.—Gautier’s Lfopées Frangaises, vol. i, p. 215, note 1, cited in 
Lang, Homer and his Age. 

2 Θρήσσαις ἐν σανίσιν, τὰς | ᾽᾿οΟρφεία κατέγραψεν | ynpus, Eur. Alc. 967-9. 

3 Theogony, 54, 916: for subjects, 100-15. 


IV THE GRAMMATA 97 


carried out by the bard retiring to some lonely place, or maybe 
barricading the door of his hut, bringing forth a precious roll, and 
laboriously spelling out the difficult letter-marks. Ipdppara, 
the Greeks called them, or ‘scratches’, And right on in mid- 
classical and later times the name for ascholar was ‘ grammatikos’. 
He was a‘man of gvammata’,! one who could deal with these 
strange ‘scratches’ and read them aloud, knowing where one 
word ended and another began, and when to make big pauses 
and little pauses. For things like that were not indicated in the 
Lrammata. 

You will have noticed that a wise man in antiquity—and the 
same is true of the Middle Ages—generally has a boy or disciple 
attached to him. And the first thing which that disciple learns 
when he begins to be ‘wise’ himself is to read in his master’s 
book. Notin any book, mark you. They did not learn reading 
in that way. You were not expected to understand the gram- 
mata unless they were first read aloud to you. The case is 
clearest with Semitic books, where the vowels are not written at 
all, and in some cases the meaning cannot possibly be made out 
for certain without help from the writer of the book. But it was 
the same in the Middle Ages: with Michael Scott's book, for 
instance. It wasthe same with various of the old Sanskrit books, 
the meaning of which has in some places been absolutely lost 
because there was a breach in the series of disciples to whom the 
meaning was orally explained by the master. The thing that 
most tangibly constituted a disciple was the power to handle, or 
to readin, his master’s book. Of course a very clever man would, 
if you gave him time, be able eventually to make out other books 
too. But that would be a special undertaking. 

This limitation, if you think of it, isinevitable. In the first place 
there will probably be no other books in the neighbourhood on 
which to practise. Then further, it must be remembered that, as 
the man’s book isa private thing, so also is his method of making 
signs. Handwritings always differ; and the handwriting of 
a man who practically never saw any other person’s handwriting 
and who used his own merely to make notes for his own private 
use, not to be read by others, would be sure—even apart from 

* See Rutherford’s Scholia Aristophanica vol. iii. chap. i, and my Religto 
Grammatict. 


2760 H 


98 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC IV 


the writer’s own conscious wish for secrecy—to grow in a 
hundred little ways specialized and abnormal. I have seen an 
Arabic book which professes to give the special alphabets’ used 
by the ancient sages, Cleomenes, Plato, Pythagoras, Scalinus, 
Socrates, and Aristotle, all of them different, ‘in order that none 
should know them but the sons of wisdom.’ 

Consider, then, the position of a man who possesses such 
a book, and also can make grammata himself. Suppose he 
hears news of strange events which he would like to record 
accurately. Suppose he is lucky enough to hear another wise 
man expounding new lore, or giving details on a subject 
where his own book is vague. Suppose he finds, or borrows, or 
inherits from a wise relation—wisdom runs in families—another 
book containing valuable information. In all these cases he will 
want to make additions and changes in his own book. Let us 
consider how he is likely to set about it. 

It is a difficult process to conflate two or more accounts of a 
transaction into one, difficult even for a modern writer, with 
all the battery of modern appliances at his command; clear print, 
numbered pages, indices to show you just where and how often 
a subject is mentioned, paragraphs and chapters, divisions of 
words and sentences, and abundance of cheap paper for making 
notes and rough copies. Our ancient sage had his book written 
on very expensive material, usually the skins of beasts carefully 
prepared. He could not lightly throw away a scroll and write 
itagain. He had no facilities for finding references; no index, 
no pages, no chapters, no stops between sentences, no divisions 
of any sort between one word and another; only one long un- 
divided mass of grammatza, not by their nature well calculated 
to be legible. On the other hand, he probably knew his own 
book by heart. It was an advantage which sometimes betrayed 
him. 

What he generally did was to add the new matter crudely at 
the end of the old. Hecould write on the margin or between the 


1 Ancient Alphabets, by Ahmad bin Abubekr bin Wahshih, translated by 
Joseph Hammer, London, 1806. ‘Every one of these kings invented, 
according to his own genius and understanding, a particular alphabet in 
order that none should know them but the sons of wisdom’ (p. 14). Are the 
‘sons of wisdom’ the disciples of the wise? The book is said to have been 
written An. Heg. 241. It is concerned with alchemy. 


IV GROWTH OF A TRADITIONAL BOOK 99 


lines. At a pinch, he might cut the hide with a knife and sew 
in a new strip at a particular place. He had only to make the 
roll intelligible to himself. And any one who has had experience 
of the difference between a MS. fit to be sent to the printer and 
a MS. that will do to lecture from will appreciate what that means, 

No book has come down to us from antiquity exactly in this 
state. All the books that we possess have at some time been 
published, and therefore prepared in some sense to be intelligible 
to the reader. But many Greek books retain clear marks of the 
time when they were not meant to be read by strangers, but 
only to serve the professional needs of the writer. The later 
Homeric hymns, containing merely a number of suitable openings 
and closes for recitations, point pretty clearly to the handbook of 
the professional reciter. The voluminous writings of the Peri- 
patetic school which come to us under the name of Aristotle bear 
innumerable traces of their composition for private use in the 
school. So do the remains of Hesiod; so do, as far as I know 
them, most of the late magical writings. In oriental literatures 
the instances are, I believe, even clearer.! 


In imagining the proceedings of this old sage we have taken 
one particular crisis, as it were, in the history of his book, But 
all the ancient traditional books which have come down to us 
have, without exception, passed through many such crises. The 
book which contained the whole Logos of the wise man was apt 
to be long-lived. It was precious; it had been very difficult to 
write; it was made of expensive and durable materials, It 


1 Peculiarly instructive is the record of the first writing down of the text of 
the Koran. Islam, being historically a late religion, has its origins exception- 
ally well attested. Zaid Ibn Thabit was entrusted by Abu-Bakr, the first 
Caliph, with the task of collecting the Prophet’s revelations—Surahs— 
preserved in part only in the breasts of the faithful. He made one official 
copy for the Caliph, being guided by his general knowledge of the credibility 
of his witnesses, As the informants naturally varied in dialect, a question 
arose as to the genuine dialect in which the revelations came; this was 
determined to be Korashite. The third Caliph made a public edition, thus 
really establishing the Koran. Unofficial copies proved to be in existence. 
These were all destroyed, and official copies sent out to the chief towns. 
The same editor was employed for this work of publishing, perhaps because 
only he could read the first edition with any certainty, The official copies 
were, after all, not much more than memoriae technicae. One who had read 
the text with a teacher could afterwards recall what he had read thereby ; 
one who saw the text for the first time would be confronted by an enigma.— 
I take this from Prof. Margoliouth’s Mohammedanism, chap. ii. 


Η 2 


100 THE .RISE OF THE GREEK EFIC IV 


became an heirloom: and with each successive owner, with each 
successive great event in the history of the tribe or the com- 
munity, the book was changed, expanded, and expurgated. For 
the most jealously guarded book had, of course, its relation to 
the public. It was not meant to read; it was meant to recite 
from. The Logos only came into full existence when spoken to 
an audience, and obviously it had to suit that audience. It was 
the source of stories and lays which must needs be interesting ; 
of oracles and charms and moral injunctions which must not seem 
ridiculous or immoral; of statements in history and geography 
which had better not be demonstrably false. The Logos must 
needs grow as its people grew. As it became a part of the 
people’s tradition, a thing handed down from antiquity and half 
sacred, it had a great normal claim on each new generation of 
hearers. They were ready to accept it with admiration, with rever- 
ence, with enjoyment, provided only that it continued to make 
some sort of tolerable terms with their tastes, under which general 
head we must include their consciences and their common sense. 

I am tempted to take instances from our own times to illustrate 
what I mean by a traditional book. The most obvious of our 
traditional books are collections of mere information like 
Whitaker's Almanack and the Statesman's Yearbook, or those 
strange prophetic Almanacs and magic Herbals which continue, 
I suppose, to enjoy a flourishing though subterranean existence 
in all European nations. Or we might take the various Guides 
to Navigation published by various countries. The Pilot series, 
issued by the British Admiralty, seems now to hold the field; 
but M. Victor Bérard! has traced its origin step by step from a 
remote past, through French, Italian, Dutch, Spanish, Latin, 
Greek, and perhaps Phoenician sources. An historical lawyer, 
again, could show the same process of traditional growth in 
various legal codes. Such literature reminds one much of the 
Catalogues of Hesiod. 

But the best modern instance of a traditional λόγος is provided 
by stage plays. A play which lives beyond a century or so 
regularly consists of (1) a slowly changing book to guarantee 
its potential existence and (2) a series of frequently changing 


1 Les Phéniciens et ? Odyssée, i. p. 52. 


mmm 


IV EXAMPLES OF TRADITIONAL BOOKS 101 


performances before an audience to bring it to fullness of life. 
The best parallels to an ancient lay, of course, would be those 
plays which are not printed, but exist only in the prompt-books 
and the actors’ memories. Unfortunately, under modern condi- 
tions, it is almost impossible for a successful play to live long 
without getting printed. And the printed book with its hundreds 
or thousands of identical copies produces a terrible fixity of text. 
The traditional Mummers’ Play, having had no authoritative text, 
has almost perished of degradation. But one would like to have 
records of the variations of George Barnwell or The Stranger 
between, their first production and the times when Thackeray 
saw them; or even of plays like Last Lynne and The Private 
Secretary, which are acted all over the English-speaking world 
at the present day. But let us take at once the most august 
example. 

flamlet, as every one knows, long before it was an English 
play was an ancient Scandinavian story, not invented by any one, 
but just living, and, doubtless, from time to time growing and 
decaying, in oral tradition. The first mention of it is in a song 
composed about the year 980; the first complete version is in 
Books III and IV of Saxo Grammaticus about the year 1185. 
There is a later form in the Icelandic ‘Ambales Saga’, and, 
of course, there are innumerable variants in all parts of the 
world.1 

There was a play called Ham/et extant in England about 
the year 1587, apparently not by Shakespeare and doubtfully 
attributed to Kyd. Many difficulties and peculiarities in Shake- 
speare’s Ham/et are presumably due to the unconscious discord 
between the old matter which he took from Kyd and the new 
matter which he invented.? The first version of Shakespeare's 
Hamlet is in the Quarto of 1603 (perhaps really printed in 1602), 
a version widely different from that which we generally read. 
It has only 2,143 verses as against 3,891 in the Globe, the order 
of the scenes is occasionally different, the names of the characters 
are not all the same: for Polonius we haye Corambis, and for 


1 See Corpus Hamileticum, by Professor Josef Schick, Munich, vol. i, 1912. 

? See especially Hamlet, an Historical and Comparative Study, by Prof. 
Elgar Stoll, Univ. of Minnesota, 1919: The Genesis of Hamlet, by Prof. Lewis 
of Yale (Holt, 1907): Humlet Once More, by the Rt. Hon. J. M. Robertson, 
1923. 


102 THE RISH SOF THE ΘΕ ΕΚ ERIC IV 


Reynaldo, Montano; the Queen, too, is definitely innocent of her 
husband’s murder. 

The Second Quarto is dated 1604 and describes itself as 
‘enlarged to almoste as much againe as it was, according to the 
true and perfecte coppie’. The First Folio was published after 
Shakespeare’s death in 1623. It omits a good deal that was in 
the Second Quarto and contains some passages which are not in 
the Second Quarto but were in the First. In nearly all cases, 
however, it has rewritten and altered them. There are many 
critical questions about these three versions which we can here 
pass by, but surely one thing is clear to any one who uses his 
imagination. The three versions which happened to be printed 
cannot possibly represent all the variations of the play which 
were spoken on the stage. Shakespeare took an old play and 
rewrote it. He rewrote his own play again and again for 
many years. He added a great deal to it, but he sometimes 
cast out again his own additions. Who can tell what additions 
or what cuts were made at various performances where Shake- 
speare himself was producing ; what additions or what cuts by 
other producers, when Shakespeare was not there? And after 
his death, though as far as we know strange hands did not make 
further additions to the play, as they certainly did to the 
Homeric poems and to some Greek tragedies, there are great 
variations of text all through the eighteenth and nineteenth 
centuries. 

There is a very instructive book in twenty-five volumes called 
The British Theatre,by Mrs. Inchbald, published at the beginning 
of the nineteenth century. It consists of a collection of the plays 
acted at Drury Lane, Covent Garden, and the Haymarket, 
printed from the prompt-books then tn use under the authority 
of the managers. One can there see what shape Aichard 777 
had assumed after Colley Cibber and other distinguished people 
had produced it. One can see Restoration comedies expurgated 
in accordance with later eighteenth-century taste; Congreve 
making references to tre Coronation of George IV; and some 
old wine in Farquhar’s ‘ Beaux’ Stratagem’ altering its date from 
1706 to 1792. The process is normal, inevitable, and, to my 
judgement, entirely right, if the plays are to live and hold an 
audience. It differs from the similar process in antiquity chiefly 


IV EXAMPLES OF TRADITIONAL BOOKS 103 


because the ancients in pre-classical times had no sense of 
obligation to the authentic words of an author, and, in any case, 
were not, like the adapters of the eighteenth century, chained by 
the leg to a printed text. The eighteenth-century producers 
could not treat Hamlet as Hamlet himself proposed to treat The 
Murder of Gonzago: ‘Set down and insert in’t’ on the spur of 
the moment ‘a new speech of some dozen or sixteen lines.’ They 
left out more than they added; in particular, they expurgated 
profanities. They said ‘For Heaven's love’ instead of ‘ For 
God’s love’ and the like. They expurgated what seemed 
grotesque or violent, or what the Alexandrians would have 
called ἀπρεπές, ‘unseemly’. They did not let Marcellus hit at 
the ghost with his partisan (Act I, Sc. ii). They cut out all the 
‘Old mole’ and ‘Truepenny’ business in Act I, Sc. v. They 
removed the indecencies of Hamlet’s conversation with Ophelia ; 
and, while they left in the whole of ‘To be or not to be’ without 
a word changed, they cut out the whole of ‘ O, what a rogue and 
peasant slaveam I!’ And this, roughly speaking, was the form 
in which Ham/et gradually conquered the world throughout the 
eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. At least, it was a 
form very much nearer to this than to either of the texts that 
appeared in Shakespeare’s life. It is instructive to imagine how 
much greater the changes would have been if, with the same 
amount of enthusiasm for Shakespeare and the same skill and 
creative power in dramatic composition which existed in the 
eighteenth century, there had been no printed books for the 
public to read, while Dryden and Pope and Garrick and 
Johnson had had a fairly free hand in retouching the prompt- 
copies ! 

But having realized from Ham/et what might have happened, 
let us notice what actually did happen in the full light of the 
eighteenth century, in the midst of printed text and professional 
critics, to two of the most famous plays of Shakespeare. I quote 
from the fascinating book of Prof. George Odell, Shakespeare 
from Betterton to Irving (Scribner’s, 1920) : 


In 1681 Nahum Tate’s Azxzg Lear was shown at Dorset 
Garden. ‘Tate's dedication to his ‘ esteem’d Friend, Thomas 
Boteler, Esq.’ says that in Shakespeare’s Lear he had found 
‘a Heap of Jewels unstrung and unpolish’d; yet so dazzling 


104 THE RISE OF THE’ GREEK CEPR IV 


in their disorder that I soon perceiv’d I had seiz’d a Treasure.’ 
The three most striking alterations were (1) an ‘ Expedient 
to rectify what was wanting in the Regularity and Proba- 
bility of the Tale’, by making Edgar and Cordelia (who 
never meet in the original play) lovers from the start; (2) 
the omission of the Fool; and (3) ‘making the Tale conclude 
in a Success to the innocent distrest Persons’, Lear restored 
to his throne, the wicked sisters dying of poison, and Edgar 
and Cordelia married. ‘Yet, says Tate, ‘was I wrack’d 
with no small fear for so bold a change, till I found it was 
well receiv’d by my Audience.’ 

The first change was due to a desire for love-interest of 
the stilted ‘heroic’ kind then popular on the stage. It 
involved doing away with Cordelia’s suitor, the King of 
France, and an implication that her cold answer to Lear 
was due to hatred of Burgundy and love for Edgar; it 
necessitated keeping her in England and compelling her to 
wander about on the heath in the fearful storm, accom- 
panied by an interpolated confidant, Arante, useful for 
sending on errands. Cordelia comes to beg Gloster to help 
her father in the storm; Edmund’s passion is excited by her 
beauty, and he sends two villains to the heath to capture her 
and carry hertohim. She fortunately and fortuitously stops 
in front of the cave of Edgar, who drives off the rogues and has 
an opportunity to behold his long-lost love at every lightning 
flash. The well-known portrait of Mrs. Cibber as Cordelia 
gives a picture of this interpolated scene. The omission of 
the Fool removed from the play one of the most fascinating, 
unearthly characters in Shakespeare; he was not restored 
to the English stage till 1838. The third alteration took 
from the sufferings of Lear all their bleak, elemental tragedy, 
and reduced the play to melodramatic limits. Finally, 
the Edmund-Goneril-Regan episode was unpleasantly am- 
plified. 

Tate’s mangling persisted for a century and a half; 
Shakespeare’s Lear was never once acted in all that time. 

Again: 

We have seen how great was the vogue of Tate's Azug 
Lear; another play to live on even longer in equally 
mangled form was Colley Cibber’s Rzchard 777, played 
first by the author at Drury Lane, in 1700. This version 
has really never been driven from the stage; it is probably 
a more effective acting vehicle than Shakespeare's. It 
simply strings together bits of Henry VI, Part LIT, Richard 
II and Richard 777. interpolating even much of the best 
part of the first scene from Henry LV, Part 77, where North- 


1V EXAMPLES OF TRADITIONAL BOOKS 105 


umberland learns of the death of Hotspur. Many lines of 
this are given to King Henry in his first scene, where he is 
informed of the death of hisson. Henry V also contributes. 
Into Richard's soliloquy on the eve of battle, fourteen lines are 
interpolated from the fourth chorus of Hexry V; lines more 
out of character it would be hard to imagine. A few other 
lines are included from Henry V, about the host of ‘ mounted 
scarecrows ’, over which the greedy crows fly, ‘impatient for 
their lean inheritance.’ This play, then, is a thing of shreds 
and patches. It omits many passages of Shakespeare's 
Richard 777, Clarence’s dream and Margaret’s curse, for 
instance, and it interpolates one by Cibber himself, that in 
which Richard informs his wife—Lady Anne—that he is 
weary of her, and means to marry her successor. The 
pathetic scene of Elizabeth’s farewell to her sons is also 
Cibber’s ; it contains but little Shakespearian material. The 
aim is to make the leading character, as Hazlitt says, more 
villanous and disgusting ; hence, the play opens with several 
scenes from the end of Henry VI, Part ITT, showing the 
murder of the King by Gloster. It has always been a 
thriller, and, as Shakespeare’s play is not among his best, 
perhaps no great harm is done. 

Few people know that the line so much admired by 
critics, the fearfully succinct line assigned to the tyrant, 


Off with his head; so much for Buckingham ! 


is Cibber’s; also the frequently-quoted ‘ Richard’s himselt 
again!" 1 
These instances show how, even in modern times, and even 
among the greatest works of imaginative art, this process of 
traditional reshaping to suit the needs of new generations has 
gone on under the nose of critics who deny its possibility or 
regard it as a wicked outrage on poetry. In antiquity the 
process was both more habitual and more drastic, but of course 
the evidence is far less full. 


Perhaps the most curious instance in Greek literature is the 
work which comes to us under the name of Callisthenes’ Life of 
Alexander. It is the source of all the mediaeval romances of 
Alexander, and old translations of it are extant in Latin—one 
made in the fourth century and one in the tenth— Syriac, 
Armenian, Coptic, Ethiopic, Persian, Turkish, Malay, Siamese, 


* Odell, vol. i. pp. 53 ff. and 75 ff. 


106 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC IV 


and doubtless other languages. The basis in each case is a word- 
for-word translation, but in every language the substance varies ; 
for it was told in each country by joug/eurs and story-tellers who 
added, omitted, and altered with a view to their audience. For 
instance, Alexander is usually—in accordance with mediaeval 
taste—made the child of a secret amour between his mother, 
Olympias, and the exiled wizard king οἵ... Of what? Of 
whatever country is most likely to please the audience. The 
earliest version was written by an Egyptian Greek. Consequently 
Alexander begins as a son of Nectanebos, king of Egypt. Then 
he is a Persian, and soon. One version, in Ethiopic, leaves him 
the son of his proper father, Philip, but makes Philip a Christian 
martyr, who committed suicide on hearing from a prophet that 
some day the Creator of the world would be crucified. 

But it is not only the different translations that vary. Every 
copy of the book differs from every other. As one editor, 
Meusel, puts it: ‘Like the MSS. of the Wzbelungenlied, every 
MS. represents a different recension.’ ‘The writers,’ says Karl 
Miiller, ‘combined the offices of scribe and author.’ That exactly 
expresses it. Each scribe who earned his living by it made it as 
good, as edifying, as entertaining a history as he could. The 
book became a thing of tradition, and grew with the ages.' 

The oldest version seems to have been written in Greek, in 
Egypt, in the time of the Ptolemies. So much can be made out. 
It professes to be the work of the philosopher Callisthenes, a real 
person, who accompanied Alexander on his campaigns, and 
whose real works have perished.?, We can also trace with some 
probability an earlier stage of the same story: viz. a series of 
imaginary letters, between Alexander and his friends, composed 
by some sophist in Egypt not long after Alexander’s death. 

I will not speak of the mediaeval epics, the Vzbe/ungentied, 
the Arthur Legends, or the great French epics centring in the 
Chanson de Roland. Each one of these subjects has its own 
peculiarities and special difficulties ; but each one would illustrate 
our main thesis equally well. Let me merely quote some words 
of Gaston Paris to illustrate the nature of a traditional book. 


1 See Appendix E. The Pseudo-Callisthenes. i 
2 An interesting fragment of Callisthenes has lately been discovered, cited 
by Didymus on Demosthenes. (Teubner, 1907. A papyrus.) 


IV THE HEBREW SCRIPTURES 107 


He is speaking of the controversy whether ‘ the author of the 
Song of Roland’ had ever seen the valley of Roncesvaux, where 
the scene of his battle is placed. The great savant answers :— 


The Song of Roland is not a work composed in one effort 
ata given moment. It comprises in itself elements of very 
different date and origin. Some go back to the immediate 
impression of the event which it celebrates; others have 
been introduced in the course of centuries by professional 
poets, who invented wholesale episodes calculated to increase 
the interest of the poem and develop its power of heroic 
and national inspiration... . The name of the author of the 
Song of Rolandis Legion. And among those who, from the 
seventh to the eleventh century, would have the right to rise 
and answer any appeal addressed to that author, it would 
be very rash to affirm that not one had ever passed by 
Roncesyaux, at a period when so many people used that road. 


How many controversies about Homer might be answered in 
similar words! ' 


The most instructive example of the growth and change of 
a traditional book under ancient conditions is to be found, I think, 
in the Hebrew scriptures. I often wonder that the comparison 
has not been more widely used by Greek scholars. The 
scientific study of the Old Testament has been carried out with 
remarkable candour and ability by many Semitic scholars of the 
last two generations. The results of their researches are easily 
accessible ; the main results may be said, in a sense, to be practi- 
cally certain. You cannot, indeed, often say with certainty in 
any particular place of difficulty, ‘ This is what happened’; but 
you can very often say with certainty, ‘ This is the sort of thing 
that must have happened.’ 

The subject is one of great interest. I fear, however, that 
interest largely depends on details ; and I am compelled here to 
content myself with the merest outline of the main facts about 
the growth of the Pentateuch. 

The central voice and the informing spirit of the Old 
Testament is the Book of Deuteronomy. We all know its main 
characteristics: an insistence on a rigid and highly spiritual 


1 Gaston Paris, Légendes du Moyen Age, p. 46 ff. See also Appendix F 
on the Aoland and the Vie de St. Alexis. 


108 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC IV 


monotheism, and an avoidance of all remains of idolatry: a great 
system of law, governing in a theocratic spirit all the details of 
life, and resulting in an ideal too strict, and in some ways too 
high, to have ever been carried out in practice: lastly, for the 
sake of this purity of religion and morals, which was associated 
with the conception of the Jews as Yahweh’s peculiar people, and 
the Temple at Jerusalem as the one seat of correct ritual and 
doctrine, an intolerant condemnation of all other places of worship, 
however sacred, and a ferocious dread of all foreign elements 
which might corrupt the orthodoxy of the chosen race. 

Deuteronomy was found in the Temple by certain sacred 
persons—we are not told who had put it there—in the eighteenth 
year of King Josiah (B.C. 621: 2 Kings xxii. 8 ff). It was 
accepted at once as the standard of a great religious reformation. 
Josiah supported the Deuteronomists, and the reformation was 
successfully carried through. Now among the other tasks which 
the reformers had before them was the re-editing of the ancient 
traditional books of the people. They needed reform in count- 
less ways. Both of them, indeed, must have been originally 
pagan and polytheistic. I say ‘ both’ rather than ‘all’, because 
in the main we can distinguish two great documents, which have 
been welded by the Deuteronomists into the narrative of the 
Pentateuch. One of the most obvious differences between them 
is that in one God is called ‘ Elohim ’"—the word translated ‘ God’ 
in our version, though it is really a plural; in the other he is 
called Yahweh, or Jehovah, the special unspeakable name of the 
Hebrew God, translated in our version ‘The Lord’. The 
documents are called ‘Jahvist’ and ‘Elohist’, or J and E 
respectively. 

J seems to have been composed—that is, put together out of 
more ancient material—in Judah in the ninth century; E in Israel 
in the eighth. They were very similar in general contents. 
Fach was an almost undifferentiated tribal Logos, a sort of 
history of the world and all the things in it that were worth 
writing down. 

A copy of J or E before the Deuteronomists altered it would 
be, for Semitic historians, the most valuable book in the world. 
The strange thing is that the reformers were able to carry their 
project through. It was necessary for them not only to alter 


IV ΤΕ ΝΕ 109 


their own versions at Jerusalem, but to suppress all old copies 
that differed from their own. Had the kingdom of Israel still 
been standing, the task would scarcely have been possible. 
There must have been, one would imagine, copies of the old 
books unexpurgated in the sanctuaries! of the Northern Kingdom. 
But Israel was now in captivity, and most of the extant copies of 
his old half-pagan books had doubtless gone with him. There 
was little danger of their idolatrous voices being heard from 
Halah and Habor and the river of Gozan and the cities of the 
Medes. Yet even so there were difficulties in Judah itself. 
There seems to have been a regular military expedition against 
the remnants of Paganism, a formal destruction of the old High 
Places, and a massacre of the priests at Bethel. At last Jerusalem 
stood alone as the only sanctuary, and the reformers had 
undisturbed control of the Book. One is reminded of Greek 
stories about the interpolation of Homer, how Solon or 
Pisistratus or another bolstered his city’s claim to the island of 
Salamis by citing a passage in the Z/zad, which the opponents of 
Athens thought spurious but were not, apparently, able to convict 
by producing an authoritative text with different wording. 

So far, then, we have found in the Pentateuch a document 
compiled from three sources, the earliest written in the ninth 
century, the latest about the year 621. But that is to leave out 
of account, at any rate as regards Genesis, the greatest, or at 
least the most formative and omnipresent, of all the sources. 
The whole book was revised again, increased by large stretches 
of narrative, and, roughly speaking, brought into its present 
shape after the return from exile, between the years 440 and 400 
B.C. This reviser, known to critics as P, was a member of the 
priestly caste. He wrote, among other things, nearly the whole 
of Leviticus. That is to say, in an average chapter of Genesis 
we may read a verse written in the ninth century followed by one 
written in the fifth, a gap of four hundred years. And some- 
times the gap will occur in the middle of a verse. Sometimes 
other sources, of unknown date, will intervene.? 

* “But was there any connexion in Ancient Israel between the priestly 
caste and literature? The later Sép/ér was the literate man.’ D.S. M. 

? e.g. Gen. ii. 4 is partly J and partly P. (See Driver’s Commentary.) So 


is xiii. 11, while xiv is from an unknown source. (Abraham, Lot, and 
Amraphel.) 


110 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC Iv 


Of course, even apart from the wholesale excision of paga- 
nism from the most ancient books, the peculiar qualities of these 
versions must have been much clearer when the books existed as 
separate wholes. We know them only in fragments: and those 
fragments have all passed under the hands both of revisers and 
of religious reformers, who must both consciously and uncon- 
sciously have modified the more striking discrepancies of style or 
statement between their various sources. Still, the differences 
are even now pretty clear: I take a few points from Canon 
Driver’s Zutroduction to Genesis.) 

J, or the Jahvist document, is a Logos of the most broadly 
human interest. It is full of poetry and drama. It delights in 
explaining the origin of human institutions—why men wear 
clothes, why snakes crawl, why child-birth is painful: who 
invented agriculture, pastoral life, music, metallurgy, the drink- 
ing of wine: how men came to have different languages: why 
Moabites, Ammonites, Canaanites, Edomites, are what they are, 
the cause being generally some significant first action, or some 
oracle spoken by a patriarch. 

The writer is full of interest in the sacred sites of Palestine, 
the altars, pillars, trees, and high places, and the reasons why each 
one of them is sacred. He has no idea of condemning any of 
them. They had not yet come into competition with the Temple 
at Jerusalem. He calls God by the name ‘ Yahweh’ from the 
beginning’, and supposes that the true religion naturally belonged 
to the primaeval patriarchs. In this, of course, the other 
prophetic book, E, differs from him. In E the ancestors of Israel 
‘beyond the river’ were idolaters (Joshua xxiv. 2, 14, 15), and 
the name Yahweh is not revealed to man till Exod. iii. 14. 
Again the Yahweh of J is frankly and naively anthropomorphic. 
He not only feels human emotions, but he performs sensible acts ; 
he #zoudds man out of earth, he A/anfs a tree, he shuts up Noah 
in the ark, he svze//s burnt meat, zvest/es with Jacob, and fakes 
off the wheels of the Egyptian chariots. 

Now let us contrast with this the work of the latest writer of 
all. P takes no interest in the origin of human institutions, only 
in ritual: no interest in sacred sites, only in the Temple at 
Jerusalem; his God is, practically speaking, never anthropo- 

1 Differences of J, E, P. 


IV DIFFERENCES OF J, E, AND P III 


morphic. His history of the world has been mapped out in 
a scheme of genealogies and dates, and especially of covenants 
between Yahweh and his chosen people, Israel. There are three 
stages of history marked by a gradually diminishing length of 
human life, and by the revelation of God under three distinct 
names: Elohim, El Shaddat—the obscure name revealed to 
Abraham in Gen. xvii—and finally Yahweh. The Patriarchs 
raise no altars, perform no sacrifices. ‘No act of worship seems 
to be thought of till the appropriate place has been constructed 
and the right persons appointed for its performance. The first 
sacrifice recorded is that of Aaron and his sons in Levy. vii.’ 
The promises of God are strictly limited to Israel itself, and the 
abiding presence of Yahweh with his people is dependent on the 
directions for the exact construction of the tabernacle (Exod, xxix). 
It is all sacerdotal through and through. 

Thus there is a period of four hundred years between the 
earliest and latest of the large integral documents constituting the 
Book of Genesis. But the period of growth was much longer 
than that. In the case of Genesis the argument does not come 
out quite so clearly; we can take our illustration more easily 
from the Booksof Samuel. As the earliest source in Samuel we 
have the so-called ‘ Court narrative’ of David, attributed to the 
tenth century B.c. At the other end there are considerable 
slices of narrative which are found in the ordinary Hebrew text, 
but not in the Septuagint translation, which was made about the 
year 200 B.C. Of this fact two explanations are possible. 
Either, and this seems the simpler hypothesis, the narratives in 
question were not in the Hebrew text from which the Septuagint 
was translated ; or else they were in the Hebrew text, and were 
deliberately left out by the translators. On either hypothesis it 
is clear that the authorized text was not definitely established. 
A traditional book of which large parts can be left out or put 
in at discretion is still in the stage of growth. The Book ot 
Samuel, then, was in process of growth for considerably more 
than seven hundred years. And that is without reckoning the 
small corruptions or verbal changes which seem to have occurred 
much later. In some books, for instance, there are changes 
directed against the claims of Christianity. 

But, returning to the Pentateuch: when J or E was first com- 


112 THE. RISE OF THE (GREBR EPIC IV 


posed, it was not composed out of nothing. Each of them was 
really put together in the same way as the whole composite 
Pentateuch of the Priest, by taking an older existing book, 
copying it out, adding, omitting, and sometimes altering. Many 
of these earlier sources are quoted by name, as the 7/ad quotes 
the older Argonautica. There is the Book of Jasher. From it 
come the standing still of the Sun and Moon (Joshua x. 12), David's 
lament over Saul and Jonathan (2 Sam. i. 17), and perhaps some 
verses spoken by Solomon when the Ark was brought to the 
Temple (1 Kings viii. 12), The song in Num. xxi. 14, again, ‘is 
it not written in the Book of the Wars of the Lord?’ In these 
cases the name of the older book is explicitly given. Much more 
often it is omitted. Sometimes a quotation betrays itself by 
being in verse, like the Sword-Song of Lamech, and the oracles 
spoken over their respective children by Noah, Isaac, and Jacob. 
But an insertion from a prose work would be hard to detect: 
and even the verse was apt to be worked back into prose (see 
commentators on 1 Kings viii. 12). 

Among other sources would be the mere tribal traditions, such 
as we have in the Book of Judges. Sometimes they are full and 
clear, and seem to depend on written documents. Sometimes a 
tradition consists merely of a name and a burial-place. ‘ After 
him Elon the Zebulonite judged Israel: and he judged Israel ten 
years. And Elon the Zebulonite died and was buried in Aijalon 
in the land of Zebulon.’ Aijalon is probably the same word as 
Elon. The chronology will not work. And the story seems 
merely to mean that there was at Elon or Aijalon an unknown 
grave which was regarded with reverence. 

There was more detailed tradition at the various ancient sanctu- 
aries, Hebron, Bethel, Gilgal, and the like, a source particularly 
prominent in J and E, but discountenanced by the priestly editors. 
There were fragments of history or learning adopted by hearsay 
or otherwise from more advanced nations. This is a regular 
process in primitive races, and is admirably illustrated in Professor 
Margoliouth’s short Life of Mohammed. That prophet was 
constantly picking up scraps of Christian and Jewish lore, and 
incorporating them, with inevitable mistakes, in his Koran. In 


1 Especially pp. 106 ff. Mohammed got Goliath’s name as Galut; the 
name of Saul, David’s other enemy, he had forgotten, so he made him Talut. 


IV SOURCES OF “THE PENTATEUCH 113 


the Hebrew scriptures there seems to be an especially large debt 
to Babylon, such as the stories of the Creation and the Flood; 
certain fragments about Abraham, who perhaps had the honour 
of meeting the great law-giver Hammurabi or Amraphel; and 
many elements in the Hebrew laws themselves. 

Now I realize that all this description must remain rather 
ineffective when unaccompanied by detailed illustrations. But 
the detailed illustrations would clearly take us quite beyond the 
limits of our present subject. And it is, of course, not any part 
of my business to prove the truth of the analysis of the Pentateuch. 
I merely take the results reached by a consensus of the best 
Semitic scholars, in order to show the sort of process which was 
normal in the formation of one type of ancient Traditional Book, 
and the qualities which naturally resulted therefrom. To produce 
such a composite work as one of these books in its later stages 
without inconsistencies and awkward joints would be difficult, as 
we said above, even for a modern editor with all his mechanical 
accessories and his opportunities of revision. To the ancient 
editor the difficulties were insuperable. And, as a matter of fact, 
most ancient compilations betray themselves. I will not dwell on 
the various doublets and inconsistencies which careful reading 
discovers in the Pentateuch; the two divergent accounts of the 
Creation, and of the Flood, with traces of a third in which there 
was no Flood; the inaccuracies of the chronology so laboriously 
inserted by the Priestly writer—ancient numbers, when at all 
complicated, seldom come out quite right; much less on the 
many small confusions, like that of the two wives of Esau who 
are mentioned three times, each time with different names; nor 
yet on such curious formal points as the case of the Twelve Tribes 
of Israel, which are mentioned again and again as twelve, yet 
always add up as thirteen. Such weaknesses as these are normal 
things among primitive historians. If they serve to illustrate the 
writer's lack of critical control over his complex material, they 
also are often evidence of his good (8111. - 


1 The Jahvist, very simple and anthropomorphic, narrated how Yahweh 
‘moulded’ a clay man and breathed life into him, and planted a garden and 
put the man to keep it. Then as the man was lonely, Yahweh made all 
sorts of beasts as companions for him, but none was quite satisfactory till he 
made a woman out of one of the man’s ribs, and then the man was content. 
The Priestly Document, more.advanced and scientific, gives the other story 

2760 I 


114 THE RISE ΘΕ THE GREEK ERIC IV 


I hope that by now I have succeeded in illustrating two points 
about these ancient authorless books; first, the immense periods 
of time during which they remain fluid and growing ; and second, 
the difficulties which they have in combining their multiplex 
sources. The object which I have in view is, of course, Homer. 
And I wish now to notice briefly some two or three more of the 
phenomena characteristic of this kind of writing, in order that 
we may know their faces again when they meet us in the //ad. 

First, there are the various disturbing influences that are apt 
to affect the primitive historian. I will not lay stress on mytho- 
logy and folk-lore, such as we find in the story of Samson, the 
Sun-man,! or in the Babylonish part of the Creation: nor on 
what I may call Romance, or the story-teller’s instinct, such as 
we find in the narratives of David and of Joseph. These factors 
are enormously powerful in Greek legend; Semitic scholars 
differ as to their influence in Hebrew. I will not lay stress on 
the tribal spirit, with its ramifications of patriotic devotion, party 


of the six days of creation, with a gradual process of development, as it were, 
from the lowest forms of life up to the highest, culminating eventually in man. 
We cannot be sure about the account of the Israelitish Elohist; for the 
Reviser, while combining the other two, omitted it altogether. Similarly in 
the Flood, the Jahvist tells how Noah took seven of each clean animal and 
two of each unclean; how the flood lasted some ninety-four days; and how 
Noah came out at the end of the time and offered sacrifice. The Priest tells 
how Noah took two of every animal, with no distinction of clean or unclean ; 
that distinction, he apparently argues, cannot have been known to Noah, 
because it was first revealed to Moses in Lev. xi and Deut. xiv. He tells how 
the flood lasted a year and ten days, and how at the end God made a covenant 
with Noah and set his bow in the heavens for a sign thereof. There seems 
also to be a trace of a version in which the first Man was not called Adam, 
but Enosh—the other Hebrew word for man. As to the chronology so care- 
fully introduced by the Priestly writer, Canon Driver shows that Judah 
‘marries, has three children, and after the third of them has grown up 
becomes a father again, and through the child thus born becomes a grand- 
father, all in the space of 22 years’. (Thirty-five would seem to be about 
the minimum possible.) The age of Ishmael at the time of his casting out 
varies between babyhood and adolescence. So does Benjamin’s. The wives 
of Esau are given in Gen. xxvi as Judith, daughter of Beeri, and Bashemath 
d. Elon: but in Gen. xxxvi they are Adah d. Elon and Bashemath d. Ishmael. 
And in chapter xxviii the daughter of Ishmael is Mahalath. One can see 
what sort of process this implies. The compiler of the two, or the three, 
narratives did not keep constantly looking forward and backward. He had 
no index to show him all the places where he had mentioned Esau’s wives, 
and help him to reduce them to order. In the case of the more important 
matters his memory no doubt served him, and he arranged his story consis- 
tently. But in smaller things, which were not of real gravity to him, he 
copied his authorities faithfully without noticing the occasional contradictions. 
1 yw? from WY ‘Sun’. 


IV THE DISTURBING INFLUENCES 115 


feeling, and odzum theologicum, forces at times responsible for 
the wildest misreadings and misrenderings of history. We must 
remember that as a rule an ancient writer only recorded what he 
wished to have remembered: that his book was only read within 
his own tribe or circle, and that his only business with his tribe's 
enemies was to injure them. THe thought tribally. He used his 
book as he would use his sword. But consider, as one significant 
point, the helplessness of language which generally dogs these 
early writers as soon as they have anything complicated to express. 
The writer of Gen. x. 15, for instance, wishing to express the 
relation of the Canaanites of the interior to the Phoenician city of 
Sidon, can only say: ‘And Canaan begat Zidon his first-born.’ 
The relation of the Canaanites to the Hittites, a great foreign 
nation which seems to have had some settlers in Canaan, was 
certainly different. But it is expressed in the same way: ‘ Canaan 
begat Heth.’ The tribe, the alien city, the foreign nation, are all 
treated as individuals, and their complicated relations reduced to 
that of father and son.!. Similarly Bethuel is mentioned as a 
person, the father of Rebekah, but his brothers Huz and Buz are 
tribes. Machir in Gen. 1. 23 is a person: in Num. xxxii. 40 he 
isaclan: in Num. xxvi. 29 he ‘ begets’ Gilead, which is a district. 
That district again ‘begets’ the judge Jephthah—perhaps rather 
a special case, since Jephthah had no legitimate father. 


The disturbing influences hitherto considered are all, in the 
main, unconscious. Let us consider for a few moments two 
conscious influences. Then we can make an end of these 
Semitic analogies and return to Greece. In the first place, is 
there in such a book as Genesis, for example, any conscious 
archaism? The answer is clear. The latest of all the writers 
of the Pentateuch, P, is the one who is most particular to give 
an archaic and primaeval colour to his narrative. He has used 
his historical imagination, and constructed a remarkable picture 
of the age of the patriarchs, quite unlike his own age or even 
that of his immediate authorities. According to him, the 
Patriarchs knew not the name of Yahweh, knew no altars, no 


1 The statement in x. 6, ‘Ham begat Canaan’, is different. It is definitely 
untrue, and comes from tribal animosity. It suited the Israelites’ self-respect 
to think as ill as possible of their not very distant kinsmen, the Canaanites. 
peaendy these undoubtedly Semitic tribes are assigned to Ham, the 
accursed. 


I 2 


116 THE ‘RISE OF. THE. GREEK (EPIC IV 


sacrifices, no difference between clean and unclean meats. All 
these things were specially revealed to them at later and definitely 
mentioned periods. The earlier writers, J and E, are much less 
particular. Their writing was centuries older, but the picture 
which they draw is actually more modern. They allow Abram 
to come to ‘Bethel’, or pursue his enemies to ‘Dan’, without 
being troubled by the reflection that those names were only 
the later representatives of ‘Luz’ and ‘Laish’. The Jahvist 
tells us that in Seth’s time ‘men began to call upon the name 
of Yahweh’, without thinking it necessary to revise his earlier 
narrative in which both the name and the person of Yahweh 
seem to be known to all. Probably, if we only knew it, they 
also archaized after their fashion, but, if they did, it was nothing 
to the archaizing of the Priest. It so happens that the Hebrew 
priestly writers were not interested in such things as the 
comparative antiquity of bronze and iron or the date of the 
Dorian migration. But, if they had been, you may be sure 
that they would never have allowed a mention of iron nor a 
hint of the existence of Dorians to defile their pages. These 
things are of importance for Homer. 

The practice of archaism is closely related to something far 
deeper and more wide-reaching, the practice of expurgation. 
In the case of these ancient and traditional books, which carry 
on the Logos of one age to grow into the Logos of the next, 
there must always emerge points of belief or feeling or conduct 
where the new age differs from the old. In advanced states 
of society, where the books exist in large numbers and the text 
cannot be tampered with, the usual resort is allegory. All that 
is objectionable is interpreted as meaning something else. But 
while the books are still growing, two courses are open to each 
new set of revisers. The simplest is tacitly to alter the document 
and cut out from the venerable book all that seems unworthy 
of it. This is expurgation. The other, more complex and 
more dependent on an advanced historical sense, is to recognize 
the difference in manners, and to try even in the new writings 
to maintain the colour of the older age. That is archaism. One 
may say that on the whole archaism is the normal practice, in 
style, in vocabulary, and in the selection of facts to relate. But 
when the writer is brought face to face with something which 


IV ARCHAISM AND EXPURGATION Viz, 


he honestly hates or disapproves, then his archaism breaks down 
and he resorts to expurgation. 

Now the whole of the Pentateuch is permeated by a conscious 
didactic purpose, and therefore by the spirit of expurgation. 
For one of the processes which have formed the Pentateuch is 
the gradual conversion of the sagas of primitive Semitic pagans 
into the great book of Jewish monotheism. At what date the 
early sources ceased to be pagan is open to doubt; but that 
they were once pagan is practically certain; and probably the 
work of the Deuteronomists and the Priests consisted almost as 
largely in their unseen excisions of objectionable matter as in 
the composition of their great codes, Deuteronomy and Leviticus, 
and the innumerable small additions by which we now trace 
them. Of course, as a rule, we have no means of knowing what 
expurgations or omissions have been made. The thing is cut 
out, and there is an end to it. But sometimes the excision has 
not been complete, or has in some way left traces. Let us take 
some instances. 

There is the curious set of cases in which the word Boshe¢h, 
‘Shame’ or ‘Shameful Thing’, has taken the place, or distorted 
the form, of some genuine but objectionable word. For instance, 
the title A/e/ekh, King, was applied to Yahweh as to other 
deities: and at one time in the seventh century human sacrifices 
were offered to him under that name. This was an abomination 
to the purer Jewish feeling. Wherever the word Medekh 
occurred in descriptions of these rites, the practice in the 
Synagogue was to avoid pronouncing it and say instead Bosheth. 
To indicate this, though the consonants of MLKH were not 
aitered in the text, the vowels of Bosheth were written under 
them. Hence arose an imaginary word ‘ Molekh ’—afterwards 
corrupted to ‘Moloch’—which was then taken for the name 
of some unknown god of the Gentiles. 

Again, the word ‘ Ba‘al’: this word, meaning Lord, or Master, 
was originally a perfectly innocent title, applied to Yahweh as 
well as to the gods of Canaan. Consequently many Hebrew names 
in early times were formed from Ba‘al. But to a later age they 
sounded idolatrous, and they have nearly all been altered. 
Saul’s son Ishba‘al (‘ Man of the Lord’) is turned into Ishbosheth, 
‘man of shame.’ Jonathan’s son Meriba‘al becomes Mephibosheth. 


118 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC IV 


In the case of Jerubba‘al or Gideon a different line was taken. 
The name must really have meant ‘ Ba‘al founds or strengthens’; 
but it is carefully interpreted as a sort of calembour or play on 
the sound of the words, so as to mean ‘ Let Ba‘al plead’. This 
explanation then gives rise to one of the usual stories of the 
confounding of the false God. Gideon defies Ba‘al, and Ba‘al 
cannot plead, but remains dumb! (Judges vi. 32). 

To take a different kind of expurgation, there seems to be 
some omission in the story of Cain’s sacrifice (Gen. iv. 5). No 
reason is given for its rejection. Probably the point of the 
story lay in the ritual which Cain followed. There must have 
been—so at least many authorities believe—some description of 
the two rituals. Cain performed his sacrifice in some way that 
was considered unholy or savouring of the gentiles. The older 
story mentioned Cain’s ritual in order to condemn it, the later 
editors declined to speak of it at all. There is almost certainly 
a great omission just before the story of the Flood, in the passage 
(Gen. vi. 1 ff.) which tells how ‘ the sons of God saw the daughters 
of men that they were fair, and took them wives of all that they 
chose’. The next two verses are confused and unintelligible, 
and the subject is promptly changed. 

These instances, few as they are, will perhaps suffice to 
establish the mere fact that expurgations have occurred. They 
may also incidentally show how vitally the study of the expur- 
gations in an ancient book helps towards the understanding of 
its whole spirit. The expurgations and the interpolations; all 
that a man rejects from his traditional teaching and all that he 
puts in its place; a knowledge of those two together will surely 
contain the main secrets of all that is most alive in the man’s 
own character. And the same istrueofanage. The interpola- 
tions and expurgations, if we followed the subject up, would 


* Exactly the same process has given rise to the mysterious ‘ Abomination 
of Desolation’ set up by Antiochus Epiphanes, in the well-known passages 
of Daniel (ix. 27, xil. 11). The word for abomination, Heb. }P¥, is used 
exactly like NY2 to supply the place of the unmentionable name Ba ‘al. 
What Antiochus really ‘set up’ was Baal Shamdim, the Lord of Heaven ; 
an altar, that is, to Zeus Ouranios. In place of Ba‘al we say Shiggug, 
abomination: and in place of Shamdim, heaven, which is here equally 
unclean, inasmuch as it is part of the name of a heathen god, we put the 
almost identical word Shomém, from a word meaning to destroy or lay waste. 
Badal Shamdim becomes shiggug Shomém; the Lord of Heaven becomes 
the ‘pollution’ of ‘ desolation’. 


IV ‘BOSHETH’ EXPURGATIONS 119 


teach us much about the age of the Deuteronomists and the later 
age of the Priests.'_ And I wish now to apply this method, at 
least in one of its aspects, to Homer. I shall not attempt to face 
the question of interpolation. It is too complicated a subject. 
But the traces of expurgation in Homer have been very little 
studied, and seem capable of yielding some interesting results. 
We will consider them in the next lecture. 


1 | have not attempted to analyse the expurgations of the Deuteronomists 
(D), or to find out what sort of thing they most objected to. The above cases 
are nearly all expurgations of idolatry or paganism, and that is evidently and 
by far the greatest preoccupation of the revisers. There are also some 
expurgations of immorality. As regards cruelty, they were much less 
particular than Homer, provided that the cruelty was directed against 
suitable objects. They approve of the ferocity of Samuel (1 Sam. xv) and 
the Herem generally: i.e. the extermination of all living things, beast and 
human alike, in heathen countries. (See BAN in Zzc. Aibl., and compare 
the Scandinavian custom of dedicating hostile armies to Othin by throwing a 
spear over them.) They allow even such a sympathetic hero as Gideon to 
‘thresh’ the elders of Succoth ‘with thorns of the wilderness’, without 
comment; the same may be said of David and others. In this particular 
one may note that the very late book, Chronicles, expurgates its sources: 
e.g. 2 Sam. vili. 2: ‘And he smote Moab (and measured them with the line, 
making them to lie down on the ground: and he measured two lines to put 
to death, and one full line to keep alive). And the Moabites became 
servants to David and brought gifts.’ This is repeated in 1 Chron. xviii. 2, 
except that the Chronicler omzts the words in brackets. 

Similarly the account of the taking of Rabbah, where David ‘ brought forth 
the people that were therein and put them under saws and under harrows of 
iron and under axes of iron, and he made them pass through the brick-kiln’ 
(2 Sam. xii. 31), 15 omitted altogether in Chronicles. (Driver and others, 
however, think that torture is not intended here, but only slavery.) On the 
other hand, when religious motives come in, the latest writers can be very 
savage. See 1 Kings xiii. 2 and 2 Kings xxiii. 20, where Josiah’s wholesale 
sacrifice of the priests of Baal is described with exultation. (The end of 
chap. xxiii is ascribed to a very late source, but the tone is really much the 
same in the rest of the chapter, which is by J.) 

Not perhaps actual expurgation, but something very similar, seems to 
have been at work in those cases where we find that certain very old parts 
of our extant composite narrative were not included in the Deuteronomic 
revision. For instance, in the Book of Judges, D is not responsible for chap. 
ix (Abimelech: a story possessing historical interest, but no religious value), 
nor for xvi-xxi. He ended Samson at xv. 20, after the jaw-bone victory, at 
the words: ‘And he judged Israel in the days of the Philistines twenty 
years.’ The part omitted consisted of Dalilah and the end of Samson; the 
stories of Micah, the Danites, the sin of the Benjamites, &c.—all somewhat 
unedifying. Similarly in Samuel, D has no hand in 1 Sam. xxviii. 3 to end 
(Witch of Endor), which breaks the continuity of his narrative ; nor in 2 Sam. 
ix-xx, which contains all the intimate Court stories, Bath-sheba, Rabbah, 
Tamar, &c. D ended his narrative of David with the 7ésumé in 2 Sam. viii. 
15 ff., ‘And David reigned over all Israel, &c.’ These stories are not later 
inventions. They come from the oldest material, and must have lain before 
D, who deliberately rejected them. They were, however, preserved and 
eventually inserted into the composite narrative which we now possess in an 
age which was more open than that of D to historical, antiquarian, or merely 
human interests. 


V 
THE ILIAD ASA TRADIMIONAL BOGE 


I. THE EXPURGATIONS: THE HOMERIC SPIRIT 


‘As for these passages and all others of the sort, we will beg Homer and 
the other poets not to be angry if we draw our pen through them.’— PLATO, 
Rep. iii. 387 Ὁ. 

IN considering the subject of Homeric expurgations I will take 
my instances chiefly from the //ad, because I believe the Ziad 
to be, in the ancient phrase, ‘more Homeric’ than the Odyssey, 
that is, both to have more of the definite Homeric spirit, and 
to have undergone a more thorough process of revision and 
expurgation. 

But before studying what things the poets reject we should 
be clear what sort of world they wish to represent. And we 
can. They are with conscious art depicting a past age, but 
an idealized past; a past, as Grote says, which never was a 
present. It is the normal method of high romance; the method 
of Scott in depicting the ages of chivalry; of Tennyson or 
Morris in writing about the knights of King Arthur. There is 
a conscious use of tradition and of what may almost be called 
archaeology; a genuine attempt to be true to the manners of 
a simpler society. Yet, with all its simplicity, it must be an 
age of chivalry, of heroism. Nausicaa, the king’s daughter, 
may go out with the dirty clothes in a mule-cart to wash them 
by the sea shore: so simple was life in those days! But her 
beauty and stature, and her language, and the language of others 
in speaking to her, have a majesty and a graciousness which, 
I suspect, the poet did not find or expect to find among con- 
temporary young women. Those were the days when a hero 
was really a hero and a princess a princess! 

The picture of the past is constructed with wonderful con- 
sistency. Where there is a slip or a doubtful point we find that 


V THE EXPURGATIONS 121 


it has nearly always been observed and discussed by the 
Alexandrian scholars. Greek taste, at the time when our text 
was finally fixed, was extremely careful about anachronisms. 
Thus it is likely that a text of the time of Pisistratus or earlier, 
if we could find one, would have many more anachronisms than 
our present text, which was punctiliously watched and re-edited 
by generations of ancient scholars. But from quite early times 
the Homeric poets must have been imaginatively interested 
in the Heroic Age, and have tried to represent it vividly. 
Though all the higher Greek poetry is about the same ideal 
past, no other poems treat it with quite such scrupulous tender- 
ness as the μαι and Odyssey. No other poems have been 
so fully studied and commented and re-edited. 

Attempts have been made, and are still far too common, to 
suggest that the Homeric picture of the Heroic Age is actually 
the work of a naive and primitive poet who lived in it, and simply 
described his own surroundings. But, apart from other difficulties 
in this theory, it is definitely disproved by a curious difference 
between the narrative itself and the poet’s comments upon it. 
In the narrative we have the complete heroic world. The 
heroes of the 7/zad consume only heroic food, consisting chiefly 
of ‘unspeakable flesh and sweet strong wine’. They eat 
enormous slices of roast ox or sheep or boar, and that three 
times a day. They do not condescend to boiled meat, much 
less to fish, fowl or vegetable, milk or cheese. When the 
companions of Odysseus are twice reduced to fish and wild- 
fowl, it is a case of extreme need (μ 331 ff, ὃ 368). In the 
similes, however, there is quite a lot about fishing, alike with rod 
and net and spear ; about diving for oysters and the advantages 
of asea rich in fish. There are similes taken from the catching 
of larks and pigeons, and perhaps from hawking. There is 
much about milk and cheese, and one mention of boiled pork. 
That is the poet’s own work-a-day world, where people had 
at most two meals a day and meat was a scarcity, not the world 
of the great Zeus-born heroes. 

Similarly in metaphors we hear of the trumpet (3 219, ® 388), 
which, as the ancient scholars had observed, is unknown in the 
narrative. So riding is mentioned twice in similes (O 679, ε 371), 
but in the body of the narrative ἱππῆες are charioteers. (The 


122 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC ν 


riding in K is, of course, exceptional.) Crowns and garlands 
were a commonplace of Greek social life in classical times, and 
are referred to in metaphors freely (N 736 and Schol., E 739, 
A 36, O'153, 3 485, κ 195); but the ancients have noted that 
they are never used by the Heroes. It is very significant, as 
will be seen further on, that, though the Heroes habitually fight 
with bronze, when the poet wants a hard metal for a metaphor 
he mostly speaks of iron.! 

Thus it is certain that the poet is representing with conscious 
art a past age of heroism and chivalry. Naturally, therefore, 
he excludes from it not only what is low and modern, but also 
a good deal that was really ancient, but indicated the squalor 
and brutality of the past, rather than its chivalry. 

But first a word as to method. If only we had still two or 
three versions of the //zad belonging to different times, such as 
we have of the Roland, the Alexis, or the Vrbelungentied, our 
task would be plain. If we had any remnant of a pre-Attic 
text, or even if one of our fragmentary pre-Aristarchean MSS. 


1 See Drerup I, chap. iv; and cf. the following passages :—Fish: Π 747 
πολλοὺς ἂν κορέσειεν ἀνὴρ ὅδε τήθεα διφῶν, see note below. ὃ 368 αἰεὶ yap περὶ 
νῆσον ἀλώμενοι ἰχθυάασκον γναμπτοῖς ἀγκίστροισιν, ἔτειρε δὲ γαστέρα λιμός. Π 406 
ὡς ὅτε τις φὼς... ἱερὴν ἰχθὺν ἐκ πόντοιο θύραζε λίνῳ καὶ ἤνοπι χαλκῷ (Edel). 
μ. 251 ὡς δ᾽ ὅτ᾽ ἐπὶ προβόλῳ ἁλιεὺς περιμήκεϊ ῥάβδῳ ἰχθύσι τοῖς ὀλίγοισι δόλον κατὰ 
εἴδατα βάλλων... Nets Ε 487 μή πως, ὡς ἁψῖσι λίνοι᾽ ἁλόντε πανάγρου... Ὡ 8o 
Iris plunges into the sea μολυβδαίνῃ ἰκέλη ἐς βυσσὸν ὄρουσεν ἥ Te... ἔρχεται 
ὠμηστῇσιν ἐπ᾽ ἰχθύσι κῆρα φέρουσα. yx 384 the dead suitors lying in a heap ὥς 
τ᾽ ἰχθύας οὕς θ᾽ dunes... δικτύῳ ἐξέρυσαν πολυωπῷ. Spearing : «124 ἰχθὺς δ᾽ ds 
πείροντες ἀτερπέα δαῖτα φέροντος. Good fish as an economic asset is among the 
blessings of the good king, τ 113 τίκτῃ δ᾽ ἔμπεδα μῆλα, θάλασσα δὲ παρέχῃ ἰχθῦς. 
Perhaps also I 360 Ἑλλήσποντον ἐπ᾽ ἰχθυόεντα. 

Birds caught in a net: χ 468 ws δ᾽ ὅτ᾽ ἂν ἢ κίχλαι τανυσίπτεροι ἠὲ πέλειαι ἕρκει 
ἐνιπλήξωσι, τό θ᾽ ἑστήκῃ ἐνὶ θάμνῳ... Hawking: x 302 οἱ δ᾽ ὡς αἰγύπιοι..... ἐπ᾽ 
ὀρνίθεσσι Ospwor.. « χαίρουσι δέ τ᾽ ἀνέρες ἄγρῃ. 

Milk and cheese: Β 471 Hite μυιάων ἀδινάων ἔθνεα πολλά, αἵ τε κατὰ σταθμὸν 
ποιμνήϊον ... ὅτε τε γλάγος ἄγγεα Sever. Cf. Π 643. Δ 433 ὥς τ᾽ dies... μυρίαι 
ἑστήκασιν ἀμελγόμεναι γάλα λευκόν. E 902 ὡς δ᾽ ὅτ᾽ ὀπὸς γάλα λευκὸν ἐπειγόμενος 
ouvernéev ...(rennet curdling milk). Boiled pork: Φ 362 ὡς δὲ λέβης ζεῖ ἔνδον 
ἐπειγόμενος πυρὶ TOAAD, κνίσην μελδόμενος ἁπαλοτρεφέος σιάλοιο. On which 
Schol. T observes ‘The poet himself knows the use of boiled meat, but does 
not represent the heroes using it’. So on the oyster-diver in II 747 the 
Schol. T says ‘This does not agree with the general life of the heroic age. 
Not even the luxurious Phaeacians or the Suitors are represented as using 
such things (as shellfish)... . He represents them using neither fish nor 
birds, tho’ Odysseus’ companions do try them under stress of need (δ 368). 
In general he avoids such usage because of its meanness (τὸ μικροπρεπές) and 
makes them use roast flesh, so that he can say of Achilles ‘Automedon held 
the flesh and Achilles cut’; imagine what the effect would be of making the 
Son of Thetis clean a fish or boil soup !’ 


V THE EXPURGATIONS 122 


were complete! As it is we are forced for the most part to 
search in our present text for small things that look suspicious 
and lead us to probabilities, not facts. Yet there is some 
positive and definite evidence also. Our knowledge of the text 
of the Zézad does, after all, just reach back to the time when 
it was not yet absolutely fixed, when it was still possible for 


a reader who greatly disliked something in his MS. of the 7/ad 


to ‘obelize’ it or cut it out as unworthy of Homer. If we study 
the passages deleted or condemned by the earliest critics known 
to us, it is impossible not to see that, though the text was by 
then almost fixed, the process of expurgation was still active. 
Passage after passage is condemned or criticized as ἀπρεπές, 
‘unseemly’. The only cases that are perfectly demonstrable, 
of course, are those in which two versions are preserved; where 
either our text contains lines which some other authority con- 
demns, or some other authority preserves lines which have been 
dropped out of our text. 

For instance, there are four lines in the Phoenix story (I, 458- 
61) describing that hero’s wish to murder his father, of which 
Plutarch tells us that Aristarchus cut them out ‘in fear ’, because 
of their bad morals. There is a line just above (453) where 
Phoenix, speaking of his mother’s infamous suggestion, says 
‘Her I obeyed and did’ (τῇ πιθόμην καὶ ἔρεξα): certain ancient 
critics read the line, ‘Her 7 advsobeyed and did not’ (τῇ οὐ 
πιθόμην οὐδ᾽ ἔρξα). In the Story of Ares and Aphrodite in the 
Odyssey, the scholia tell us of ten lines (6 333-43) which were 
absent from some copies ‘ because of the unseemly suggestion’, 
while we know that some ancient critics rejected the whole 
episode. ‘There is an interesting deletion on quite other grounds 
in H 195-9. Aias is going forth to single combat with Hector, 
and bids his companions to pray to Zeus ‘ sz/ently within your- 
selues, so that the Trojans at any vate may not hear’—and 
80 use counter-prayers. A little mean, that, especially for Aias; a 
little like mere witchcraft, such as the Norse heroes so vehemently 
denounce and repudiate. It is followed by a healing line: ‘Or 
pray openly if you will; Iam not afraid.’ But the best critics, 
Zenodotus, Aristophanes, Aristarchus, all unite in rejecting the 
whole passage. It was safest away. 

It is instructive to look through the whole list of passages 


124 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC ν 


rejected from the //zad by the great critics. Our testimony is 
miserably deficient, especially for Zenodotus, who matters most 
of the critics because he was the earliest and the most drastic. 
But there is enough to show that they rejected a great quantity 
of lines on pure grounds of expurgation:! passages where the 
Gods misbehave more grossly than usual, passages which 
attribute to the heroes coarse language or unworthy motives, 
above all, passages where the suspicious eye of a moralist saw 
traces of the work of those infamous persons who misinterpreted 
the relations of Achilles and Patroclus.? 


1 Whether they had or had not MS. authority for their deletions does not 
affect the argument. If they had, then the pre-Alexandrian confusion was 
even greater than our existing evidence proves. And we should then have to 
assume (1) that the attempt to expurgate these passages had been made 
before Zenodotus (which is pretty certain); (2) that in the turmoil of texts 
the critics were largely decided by expurgatory motives. I append a rough 
list of some typical ‘ unseemly’ passages which were condemned by ancient 
critics : 

Unseemliness in the Gods: A 396-406 (gods frightened by Briareés) ; 
B 111-18 (Agamemnon’s blame of Zeus); B 157-68 (Hera to Athena); 
T 396-418 and 423-6 (Helen and Aphrodite) ; © 35-40 (violent speech of Zeus 
followed by apology) ; © 385-7 (Athena puts on her father’s tunic); © 420-4 
(Iris repeats message and adds insults of her own); A 78-83 (Gods angry 
with Zeus; perhaps other reasons for excision); = 317-27 (the Leporello- 
catalogue of Zeus’s amours); O 5 a (decidedly ἀπρεπές, and dropped from our 
texts); O 18-31 (threats of Zeus to Hera); O 212-17 (threats of Poseidon) ; 
II 432-58 and 666-83 (discussion of gods about Sarpedon and its sequel ; 
probably some religious objection at work to reinforce critical reasons) ; 
= 356-67 (Zeus to Hera); ® 471, 475-7 (Artemis reviling Apollo); Ὡ 2of. 
(Apollo and the dead Hector; religious expurgation); Ὡ 23-30 and 71-3 
(proposal that Hermes should steal the corpse, and statement that he could 
not); 423 (cf. 20f.). 

Unseemliness in Heroes: A 225-33 (‘ Drunkard with the eyes of a dog,’ 
ἄς); B 193-7 (treachery imputed to Agamemnon); © 164-6 (abusive 
language ?); © 284 (‘reared you in his own house, bastard as you were’) ; 
I 458-61 (Phoenix and his father); A 794f. (suggestion of cowardice in 
Achilles) ; Π 89-90 (mean motive in Achilles) ; T 77 (Agamemnon not rising : 
ἀπρεπές) ; Y 180-6, 195-8, 205-9, 251-5 (all in the discourteous scene between 
Achilles and Aeneas); ¥ 804-6, 810, 824 f. (the barbaric gladiatorial 
combat); 9 556-7 and 594 f. (unworthy motives). One may add © 189 
(giving horses wine; barbaric); and the abusive language of Thersites in 
B 227 f. and 231-4. 

2 The primitive character of these practices is proved by the archaic 
inscriptions of Thera and convincingly explained by Bethe in Rhein. Mus. 
N.F. Ixii. 438-75. By this rite the full warrior adopted the squire and 
imparted his #zava to him. Cf. Preuss in Archiv fiir Relig. 1910. That the 
‘silence of Homer’ is intentional is proved by E 266 and Y 231 f. (on Gany- 
medes). The clearest text about expurgation is Schol. T on Π 97: παντελῶς 
ἐκβλητέον τοὺς δ΄ στίχους, says Aristarchus with unusual emphasis; ‘Zenodotus 
was right in suspecting that they were inserted ὑπὸ τῶν ἀρσενικοὺς ἔρωτας εἶναι 
λεγόντων map’ Ὁμήρῳ καὶ ὑπονοούντων παιδικὰ εἶναι ᾿Αχιλλέα Πατρόκλου." 


V THE EXPURGATIONS 125 


This is the only part of the subject which is difficult to discuss. 
It is too important to omit altogether. The evidence is clear 
that there existed in early times, among both Aryans and 
Semites, and notably among the Dorians, who are generally 
reckoned among the more primitive races of Greece, certain 
forms of sexual irregularity which were in the end totally con- 
demned by the Jewish and the Athenian law, but were tolerated 
in various parts of the Aegean and even in such well-conducted 
communities as Crete. Sodom and Gomorrah, according to the 
tradition, were consumed by fire from heaven. The tribe of 
Benjamin was almost blotted out. Laius, king of Thebes, was 
involved in a fearful curse, together with his whole race. But 
early Greek traditions testify both to the existence and the 
toleration of these practices. Now Homer has swept this whole 
business, root and branch, out of his conception of life. Exactly 
the same spirit is seen at work when we compare the rude 
ithyphallic Hermae of ancient Greek cults with the idealized 
messenger of the Gods in the Odyssey. But that is merely one 
instance : for this kind of expurgation really pervades the whole 
of our Homer. 

Closely akin to this is the spirit in which our present text of 
the Odyssey treats the marriage of Alcinotis and Arété, the king 
and queen of the Phaeacians. ‘Her name was Arété, and she 
was born of the self-same parents that begat king Alcinoiis’ 
(n 54 ff.). Exactly; Hesiod too, the scholia tell us, made the 
royal pair brother and sister. There are abundant instances of 
that sort of marriage in the houses of the ancient divine kings. 
The royal blood was too superhuman to make it desirable for 
the king to wed any one lower than his own sister. Hera her- 
self was sister and spouse of Zeus. The Pharaohs and the 
Ptolemies after them made a practice of having their sisters for 
queens. In the first of Griffith’s Szorzes of the Priests of 
Memphis the doctrine that the only fit bride for Nefrekepta is 
his sister is explained and insisted upon. Hesione was sister 
and wife to Prometheus, though Aeschylus, gently expurgating, 


Schol. A agrees. They ought also, while they were about it, to have 
expurgated the word wep in 2 130. The passage of Aesch. A/yrmidones, 
fr. 135, Nauck, has been grossly misinterpreted by Athenaeus. Blass 
has ae out that the words are addressed to Ares; his ‘kisses’ are the 
wounds. 


126 THE RISE OF THE “GREBK EPIC ν 


makes her only half-sister by the father (Prom. 559). Such ἃ 
queen was doubly august. Arété, we are told, ‘was honoured 
as no mortal woman is honoured in these days, of all who hold 
their houses under a husband’s rule.’ She was hailed like a god 
when she went abroad (η 66 ff.). This is the genuine language 
of the Saga, and we know how to understand it. But in classical 
Greece there had arisen a spirit to which such a union was 
‘unholy’, zzcestam. And as we read on in the Odyssey we find 
a genealogy inserted which in somewhat confused language 
explains that when the Saga said ‘parents’ (τοκήων) it only 
meant ‘ancestors’, and when it said that Alcinotis’ brother, 
Rhexenor, died ‘childless’ (ἄκουρον) it only meant ‘ without 
male child’! Arété was really the daughter of the said brother. 
It was only a marriage between uncle and niece. 


Next, there has been a very careful expurgation of divers cruel 
or barbarous practices, especially, I think, of those which seemed 
characteristic of inferior races. The //zad is full of battles, and 
of battles fought with extraordinary fire. Yet the spirit of them 
is not savage. It is chivalrous. No enemy is ever tortured. 
No prisoners—with one exception to be noticed later—are ever 
maltreated. Let us take two special cases where signs of ex- 
purgation are visible. 

We know that the dead body of Hector was dragged by 
Achilles round the walls of Troy. That seems bad enough. 
It seemed so to the poet: and the repentance of Achilles 
is the main theme of the last two books of the //Zad. But 
a far worse story was really handed down by tthe tradition. 
There are fragments of the rude unexpurgated saga still extant, 
according to which Hector was still alive when his enemy tied 
him to the chariot rail and proceeded to drag him to death. 
Sophocles, always archaic in such matters, explicitly follows this 
legend (47ax, 1031). So does Euripides (Audrom. 399). Even 
so late a writer as Vergil seems to adopt it.1_ In fact, it may be 
said on the whole to dominate the tradition. But Homer will 
have none of it (X 361-95). Hector was dead—we are told so 
not only in explicit language, but with rather peculiar repetition 


1 Aeneid ii. 273 ‘perque pedes traiectus lora ¢umentis.’ Vergil was 
probably copying the ///# Perszs in this passage. 


ν PORPURE? ΝΘ TO THE DEAD 127 


—before Achilles began the ἀεικέα ἔργα, ‘the shameful deeds.’ 
‘ And a dust cloud rose about him as he was dragged, and the 
long dark hair spread wide, and all the head lay in the dust, 
which before was beautiful; but now Zeus gave him up to them 
that hated him, to be foully wronged in his own fatherland.’ 

Again, there is, as we have said, no torture in the //ad. But 
there is a passage where a particularly dreadful wound is de- 
scribed with, possibly, a certain gusto. The writhing man is 
compared to a bull struggling in a net, and his pain is dwelt 
upon. So far, perhaps, some older poet. But immediately a 
saving line is added—a line of the sort that is technically called 
‘inorganic’, that is, which can be added or left out with no effect 
upon the grammar or continuity. It runs, ‘So he struggled 
guite a little while, not at all long’ (μίνυνθά περ, οὔ τι μάλα δήν, 
N 573). Now in the Odyssey, which, as I have said, is less 
rigorously cleaned up than the //ad, there is one scene of 
torture. It is where the treacherous handmaids and the goat- 
herd are to be killed. It has been decreed that the handmaids 
shall not ‘die by a clean death’. They are then hung up ina 
row with nooses round their necks, ‘so that they should die in 
grievous pain’. So far, I think, the older poet. There follows 
instantly the same saving verse: ‘ Their feet struggled for quite 
a little while, not at all long!’ (y 473). The torture of women 
was unpleasant even to an audience which approved the cruelty 
to the goatherd. 

Take another case, equally clear. The ordinary practice of 
Homeric war allowed a warrior to take his dead enemy’s armour. 
This has, I suppose, been the case in all ages. But there was a 
way of stripping the slain which added a sting of outrage to the 
spoiling. The victor tore the dead man’s tunic and left him 
naked. This practice has been for the most part expurgated 
out of the poems. Heroes are allowed to speak of it as a 
possibility, or even to threaten it.1 But they are not allowed 
actually to practise it. There are two instructive passages. In 
N 439 Idomeneus has pierced a man through the breast, and 
then ‘rends his tunic about him’. That is not pleasant: so the 
line is added, ‘even the tunic of bronze, which aforetime pro- 


1 B 416, Π 841, just as they speak ot aixia to the dead as a possibility, 
Π 545, 559, and often. 


128 THE RISE OF THE \GREBK EPIC ν 


tected his body from death. The tunic becomes a tunic of 
bronze. It was only the man’s breastplate that Idomeneus 
‘rent’! In another passage, too (A 100), there are signs of a 
confused effort to escape from this barbarity. Agamemnon has 
slain some men and taken their armour; then he leaves them 
‘with their breasts gleaming, when he had stripped off their 
tunics’, So it must originally have run. But in our present 
texts, instead of ‘tore’ or ‘stripped’, there is a word (περίδυσε) 
which occurs nowhere else in Homer, but which must by all 
analogy mean ‘drew round’ or ‘put on’. Agamemnon has 
decently drawn the dead men’s tunics over them!! There are 
many struggles on the part of commentators. There isa variant 
reading which settles the matter by saying nothing about tunics 
at all. Perhaps the most curious thing, linguistically, is that the 
force of the context was too strong for the natural meaning of 
the word περιδύω, and in later Greek it was normally taken, on 
the strength of this passage, as meaning ‘to strip’. Of course, 
this sort of thing breeds confusion, and the corrector is no doubt 
prepared to face it. The audience may be puzzled for a second. 
But that will pass. If you told them that Agamemnon, their 
great king, did on the battle-field one of those revolting things 
that barbarians delight in and all decent Greeks utterly abjure, 
the awkwardness would not pass so easily. 

Another very interesting instance has been pointed out to 
me by Professor J. A. K. Thomson. All through the poem 
the heroes threaten at times to cut off one another’s heads, and 
sometimes in hot blood actually do so (e.g. 4 147, N 202 ff.). 
In P 39 Euphorbus threatens to carry off the ‘armour and head’ 
of Menelaus; at 125 Hector is dragging Patroclus in order to 
‘cut the head off his shoulders with sharp bronze’. In ¥ 177 
Hector’s heart urges him to cut off Patroclus’ head and fix it up 
on a post, like an African chief. And in the same book, 334, 
Achilles, addressing the dead Patroclus, says, ‘I will not bury 


1 στήθεσι παμφαίνοντας, ἐπεὶ περίδυσε χιτῶνας, A 100, See various interpre- 


tations and strange constructions in Ameis, Anhang. Povelsen, the first of 
modern scholars to point out the proper meaning of περιδύω, actually thought 
that Agamemnon put on the shirts himself. Van Leeuwen and others call 
the lines spurious or corrupt. The ancient v. |. referred to is ἐπεὶ κλυτὰ τεύχε᾽ 
ἀπηύρα. Aristarchus himself made παμῴφαίνοντας agree with χιτῶνας, an 
obvious makeshift. 


Vv 7 MUTILATION: POISONED ARROWS 129 


thee till I bring to thee here Hector’s armour and head.’ Com- 
pare X 348. 

‘ Now I think,’ writes Mr. Thomson, ‘ that in the original story 
Achilles carried out his threat. Look at the passage where 
Achilles’ dealings with the body of Hector are described, 
W 24 ff. “So spake he, and devised upon godlike Hector 
hideous deeds (ἀεικέα ἔργα) : having stretched him prone by the 
bier of Patroclus ...” He did what? Presumably deeds that 
deserved to be called ‘hideous’, but all that follows is: “in the 
dust; and the Myrmidons began to put off their armour and 
loosed their steeds.” I cannot get away from the impression 
that something objectionable has been left out after τανύσσας, 
and the threat beforehand enables us to guess what that some- 
thing was.’ 

It is interesting in this connexion to remember the story in 
Herodotus ix. 78, how Lampon, son of Pytheas, proposed to 
King Pausanias, after the battle of Plataea, that he should cut off 
the Persian Mardonios’ head and fix it up on a pole, and the rage 
with which Pausanias rejected such barbarity; or the horror 
with which Aeschylus speaks of ‘lands where men’s heads are 
cut off and their eyes put out by process of law, boys castrated 
as eunuchs and men mutilated, stoned and impaled’ (zz. 186), 
Such deeds belonged to the “ Beastly Devices of the Heathen,” 
and were not likely to be tolerated in Homer, 

Again, there is the matter of poisoned arrows. There is no 
doubt whatever that the primitive inhabitants of Greece poisoned 
their arrow-heads. The very word for poison,! τοξικόν, means 
‘belonging to an arrow’. And many myths tell of the incurable 
and burning pains caused by arrows. The arrows of Heracles 
in Hesiod (AsZzs, 132) ‘had death on the front of them and 
trickled with drops’ (cf. Scholia). Think of the hydra-dipped 
shafts of Philoctetes. Think of the arrows of Apollo, bringing 
pestilence. Think also of the peculiar word, so often applied to 
arrows and arrow wounds, ἄφυκτος, ‘from which there is no 
escape’, Does it not mean ‘incurable’ much more than 


1 This has been questioned, but cf. Strabo, p. 165d Ἰβηρικὸν δὲ καὶ τὸ ἐν 
ἔθει παρατίθεσθαι τοξικόν, ὃ συντιθέασιν ἐκ βοτάνης σελίνῳ mpocopoias, Also 
Dioscorides, vi. 20 τοξικόν, ἐκ τοῦ τὰ τόξα τῶν βαρβάρων im’ αὐτοῦ χρίεσθαι. 
This puts the point exactly: poison was barbarous. Cf. also Luc. WVigrin. 
37 and Paul. Aegin. 5. 53, where τοξικόν is a special poison. 


2760 K 


130 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC V 


‘unerring’? The same thought explains why Erds is generally 
armed with arrows, not with a great spear. He makes a wound 
which looks slight, which perhaps hardly shows: but there is 
in it a burning poison from which the stricken man does not 
escape. 

Now in the Z/ad this poison has been completely cleaned 
off from the arrow-heads. Poison is treacherous, ungentle- 
manly ; a weapon for low barbarians, not for heroes. Yet you 
can see from a number of lines what the arrows originally were. 
Old phrases have been left unchanged: when Pandaros shoots 
Diomédés in the shoulder he shouts in triumph that he cannot long 
‘support the strong arrow’, that is, that he cannot long survive 
(E 104). In 4 139 the arrow only just grazed Menelaus’s skin ; 
but Agamemnon immediately thought he would die.’ In v. 218 
Machaon the leech attends to this wound, and the first thing he 
does is to suck out the blood. Why, unless it was poisoned ? 
In E 394 the story is told how Heracles once wounded Hera with 
an arrow, and ‘the incurable pain laid hold of her’. Archers in 
Homer chose out an arrow ‘unshot before’, whose poison had 
not been rubbed off (4 117, &c.). An arrow is habitually 
described by epithets which gain point as soon as we remember 
that arrows once were poisoned. They are ‘bitter’, ‘charged 
with groans’, ‘a foundation of black anguish’.2 The Odyssey, 
as before, being less expurgated, is more explicit. In a 261 we 
are told how Odysseus once went to Ephyra, to Ilos, son 
of Mermeros—an ominous name—to seek a man-slaying drug 
to anoint his arrows withal. But Ilos would not give it him. 
He feared the emesis of the eternal gods. ‘ But my father,’ the 
speaker continues, ‘gave him some. For he loved him greatly.’ 
The Odysseus of the earliest legends must of course have used 
poison.’ 

We come next to amore complicated subject. With one excep- 
tion, to be considered later, both //ad and Odyssey are com- 
pletely expurgated of the abomination of Human Sacrifice. 


Of course, in the present course of the story, Agamemnon is reassured by 
finding the wound slight. 

Ὁ age diords, βέλεα στυνόεντα, μελαινέων ἕρμ᾽ ὀδυνάων (whatever ἕρμα may 
mean). 

5. Cf. Laws of Manu, vii. 90. ‘In war no poisoned weapons are to be 
used, and no insults are to be addressed to a fallen enemy.’ I take this note 
from Mr. Romaine Paterson’s eloquent book, Zhe (emesis of Nations. 


- — —— 
.-.-...  -Ὲ----ς---- 
————— 


Vv HUMAN SACRIFICE: VIRGINS 1531 


The Homeric spirit would have no dealings with such things. 
It had too much humanity: it had too little intensity of supersti- 
tion. It did not denounce human sacrifice as Jeremiah, for 
instance, denounced the rites of the Tophet outside Jerusalem.! 
It is not Homer’s way to denounce a thing that he objects to. 
He merely sweeps it cut of existence. 

The early Greek myths are full of human sacrifices. One can 
think at once of Menoikeus, Athamas, Phrixus and Hellé, the 
children of Heracles, Macaria, Iphigenia, Polyxena, and the 
numerous virgin-martyrs of tragedy. If these stories were mere 
fiction, it would be possible—though still difficult—to hold that 
they were unknown to ‘Homer’: that they were the horrid in- 
ventions of later poets, trying to outbid their predecessors. But 
they are not fiction. Nearly all of them come straight from some 
ancient and disused religious rite, or some relic of very primitive 
tradition. Iphigenia, for instance, is a form of an ancient an- 
thropoctonous goddess, identified with Artemis.2_ Polyxena is 
a queen of the Underworld, ‘ Poly-xeina,’ ‘She of the many 
Guests,’ the wife of ‘Polydector’ or ‘Polydegmon’. Some of 
these bloody traditions are doubtless Phoenician, and therefore 
later.2 But others are pre-Hellenic. And even those due to 
Phoenician influence were more than early enough for those 
middle and later generations of the Homeric poets which were 
mainly responsible for the work of expurgation. In the case of 
Iphigenia, indeed, one can almost see the marks of the excision.* 
Now Homer has cut out these stories for their revoltingness, just 
as he cuts out the cannibalism of Lycaon and Pelops, or the 
mutilations of the Hesiodic gods. That is a sufficient reason, 


ter vil. 21: xix. 5 ff.) xxxit. 35; Ezek. xvi20 f, 36, xx. 26, 31, xxiii) 37, 
39. Cf. Mic. vi. 6-8, &c., and laws in Deut. xii. 31, xviil. 10, ἄς, 

? Artemis-Iphigenia worshipped in Hermione, Paus. ii. 35. 1. Cf. Hesych. 
᾿Ιφιγένεια" ἡ "Aprepis (Farnell, Cults of Greek States, vol. ii, chap. xiii, note 34), 
and βωμὸς θεᾶς μοι μνῆμα τῆς Διὸς κόρης (Eur. 2. A. 1444), i.e. Artemis’s altar 
was Iphigenia’s tomb! 

5 On the date of the main period of Phoenician influence in Greece see 
Myres in C. 2. x. pp. 350 ff., and my article ‘Odysseus’ in the Quarterly 
Review for April, 1905. 

* (B 303-29; cf. Aesch. Ag. 115 ff., and the Cyf7vza.) In Aeschylus and 
the Cy~ria, when the bad omen occurs, Calchas declares that Artemis is 
wroth with Agamemnon and demands the sacrifice of Iphigenia. In B, when 
the δεινὰ πέλωρα invade the hecatombs and the Greeks are silent with horror, 
Calchas rises and declares—merely that they will take Troy in the tenth 
year! One cannot but suspect that originally there was a price demanded 
for that victory. 

Kk 2 


1322 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC) V 


and, as regards the Odyssey, it may be the only one that operates. 
But if we look closer into the old stories of human sacrifice we 
shall see that the subject has ramifications, and that there were 
other causes contributing to this cleansing of the Homeric atmo- 
sphere. With most of them we shall sympathize, with one 
possibly not. 

To take the latter first. The stories of human sacrifice that 
have come down to us in myth are nearly all, for some reason or 
other, sacrifices of virgins. One cannot be quite sure whether 
this is due to history or to romance, The stories generally occur 
in the climax of a tragedy or some similar place, where they are 
intended to produce an effect of romantic horror. So that 
naturally young virgins are chosen as the victims, rather than, 
let us say, middle-aged merchants. Yet, on the other hand, it is 
likely enough that when such deeds were done it was more the 
practice to slay a young girl thana man. The girl was more 
likely to be ceremonially perfect: she was of less value to the 
tribe; she would be, at the best, more ready to die willingly, 
and, at the worst, easier to kill. 

Now the Odyssey stands on a different footing; but I suspect 
that these stories would have been rejected from the //ad, not 
only because human sacrifice was a barbarity, but also because 
the stories involved too intense an interest in women. 

The Achaioi of the //ad are habitually described by a rather 
curious phrase, κάρη κομόωντες, not so much ‘long-haired’ as 
‘letting the hair on the head grow long’. We may remember 
the long hair of the Spartans at Thermopylae, and the Ζωριέες 
τριχ-ἀϊκες. As to the original meaning of this phrase, I cannot 
help suspecting that we may follow up a hint thrown out long 
since by Robertson Smith. It means that the men were votaries.' 
They had made a vow - ὑπόσχεσις is the Homeric word *—to 
take Troy, and this implied a vow not to do certain specified 
things until they had taken Troy. Like the warriors of the Old 
Testament, they were consecrated.* In modern language they 


' Analogous cases in Religion of the Semites, p. 333, and Additional Note 1, 
Taboos incident to Pilgrimages and Vows. 

2 B 286 ff. ὑπόσχεσις of the Greeks. In B 349 it is Διὸς ὑπόσχεσις ; in B 339 
it is ὅρκια. In Y 84 Aeneas ὑπέσχετο (had made a vow) to fight Achilles. 
The Franks had similar practices. 

5. Cf, 2 Sam. xi. 11 (Uriah), 1 Sam. xxi. 4f., and WAR in Zinc. Bibl. Cf. 
also Paus. i. 37. 3, Vili. 41. 3 (hair kept for river worship). 


Vv SUPPRESSION OF WOMEN 133 


were faboo while on the war-path, and the duty of never cutting, 
combing, or washing the hair was the visible sign of various 
other abstinences. The most important among these was 
abstinence from sexual relations with women. I think that the 
Itad is quite consistent throughout in the recognition of this 
taboo, a somewhat surprising fact. For the Poems seldom care 
to be consistent about anything that does not occupy the front 
plane of a hearer’s attention. The nearest approach to a breach 
of it is perhaps the situation in A. It seems odd that men under 
a vow of this sort should quarrel about women-captives. But it 
only seems odd because we think of the siege of Troy as a long 
period. The Greeks had some hopes of taking Troy that very 
day (B 29, 66, 413), and then the vow would be ‘ off’, Agamem- 
non’s language is strictly correct (vv. 31, 113). He always 
associates his love of Chryseis with ‘home’ and ‘returning to 
Argos’. True, Achilles and Patroclus do not observe the taboo 
in I, but that is because they have definitely renounced it, as they 
have renounced their part in the war (I 665 ff.).! Agamemnon 
seems to have observed it (I 133, 275). Nestor is too old to be 
bound by it, and is waited upon by a handmaid, Hecamédé 
(A 624). I suspect that the peculiar woman-ignoring atmo- 
sphere of the 7/ad may have been due originally to this ancient 
taboo of warriors on the war-path; and that later, when the 
actual religious ground had been forgotten, there remained 
a womanless atmosphere and a feeling that any female interest 
was out of place in a high story of war. That is why there is no 
Brunhild or Guinevere among the motive forces of the Ziad: 
only a Patroclus. Love fora friend and fellow soldier is the only 
love austere enough for this strife of heroes. 

The exceptions to this ignoring of women are to be found 
among the women of Troy, chiefly Helen and Andromache. 

’ Cf. ¥ 144, where Achilles renounces, for specific reasons, the vow not to 
cut his hair. This perhaps explains the breach of the taboo in Q 676, 
There seems to be a dim recognition of some such custom as I suggest in 
Schol. AD on B 11, explaining the words κάρη kopowvtes. ‘The Greeks of old 
used to let their hair grow long ἀρετῆς καὶ ἀνδρείας χάριν Where was the 
‘courage and virtue’ unless it was in some vow of the war-path ?—Of course 
it is not suggested that everybody who was not keeping his vow had his hair 
short; e.g. Hector in X 402, Euphorbos, P 51f., and of course Paris, whose 
motives are obvious. There may be a reference to this custom in the 
Tee of Ajax’s sailors, ἐρώτων δ᾽ ἐρώτων ἀπέπαυσεν οἴμοι (ὁ πόλεμος), Soph. 


134 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC ν 


The Trojans were not under any such vow as the Achaeans. 
They would have been only too glad for the war to stop any day. 
They were not growing their hair long. Ina Trojan atmosphere 
women can be described and made interesting. It is ina Trojan 
atmosphere, in the close neighbourhood of the great parting 
of Hector and Andromache, that we have the one mention in the 
Ltvad of tragic or guilty love, the story of Anteia’s passion for 
Bellerophon. And how sternly it is cut down to a bare résumé 
of facts! That whole subject, which has formed the most fruitful 
spring of modern drama and romance, occupies in the whole 
Ltad six lines out of some fifteen thousand! (Z 160-5). These 
Trojan princesses in the 7Zad and many beautiful passages in 
the Odyssey show how the Homeric poets could write about 
women if they would. But in the case of the Trojan women 
themselves we may notice two points. In the first place, splendid 
as their pictures are, there is no love interest about them. The 
whole of that subject is steadily ignored. Secondly, the great 
passages all occur in what are generally considered as late parts 
of the Ziad: and, as we shall often have occasion to notice, the 
later parts of Homer show in many ways a growth of the spirit of 
drama or tragedy. To the mind of a poet who had begun to 
move toward that great conception, the position of the women in 
a besieged and doomed city must have been in itself a subject of 
such compelling interest that he might well venture to the very 
verge of his traditional field in order to treat of it. Andromache, 
the loving and noble wife of the great enemy, is a being made 
for tragedy. 

But outside these two or perhaps, if we add Hecuba, three 
Trojan women there is a steady suppression of female interest in 
the Zéad. There is no sacrifice of Iphigenia; no sacrifice of 
Polyxena.!. The Amazons, firmly seated as they are in early 
Epic legend, are only mentioned in late and so-called spurious 
passages (I’ 189, Z 186). The crimes of the great wicked 
heroines, Clytemnestra, Epicaste, Eriphyle, Procne, Althaia, 
Skylla, and the like, are kept carefully away from the Z/ad, and 

1 Cf. Paus. i. 22. 6 of Polyxena: ‘Homer did well to omit so savage a 
deed ; and he did well, I think, to represent Skyros as captured by Achilles, 
therein differing from those who say that Achilles lived in the company 


of the maidens at Skyros.’ The case of Clytemnestra in the Odyssey is 
peculiar, and needs separate treatment. 


V HUMAN SACRIFICE: DIVINE KINGS 135 


allowed only a scanty mention in the Odyssey. There is nothing 
about Creusa, Aeneas’s wife, though she was an important 
character in saga and received worship as a goddess. There is 
nothing about the prophetess Cassandra. The prophesying of 
Troy is done by a man, Helenus. Through nearly all the Ziad 
there reigns that austere and unsympathetic spirit which breathes 
in the words attributed to Pericles, ‘ that a woman’s fame is to be 
as seldom as possible mentioned by men, either for praise or 
blame’ (Thuc. ii. 45). This Thucydidean spirit is curiously 
different from that of Aeschylus and Euripides. It is quite 
different even from that of the Odyssey. It is a spirit so mon- 
strously arrogant that we are apt to overlook a certain grandeur 
which it possesses. When one thinks of the part sometimes 
played by women in history—for instance, in French history— 
one must feel, to put it at the lowest, a certain perverted spiritual 
dignity in the fact remarked upon by Wilamowitz, that in the 
whole political history of Athens there is only one woman, but 
she pervades everything: the mail-clad Virgin of the Acropolis. 

The victims, then, in these stories of human sacrifice are in 
most cases virgins. But they have another characteristic. They 
are all, without exception, persons of royal blood. That is to 
say, they all owe their original creation to that dark and wide- 
reaching tract of early religion which has lately been illuminated 
to us by the work of Dr. Frazer. At the back of them stands 
that to us almost incomprehensible being, which somehow com- 
mended itself to the mind of primitive man, the divine king 
who embodies the life of his tribe, and who must be born 
anew at fixed periods lest that life should grow weak. He is 
generally called a vegetation spirit, since the welfare of the trees 
and crops is the first need of an agricultural tribe. But he affects 
not only the fruits of the soil, but also the flocks and the human 
beings. So it is better to consider him as embodying the life, 
or the vital force, of the community. As such he is the seed and 
origin of thetribal god. Ifthe tribal god is a beast or totem, as he 
may be, it is because at a pre-theistic stage such a beast was the 
chosen vehicle of the tribal life. 

I will not spend more words in explaining this worship of the 
divine king ; is it not written in the Golden Bough, in the History 
of the Early Kingship, and the lectures on AZt1s, Adonis, and 


136 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC ν 


Osiris? In their origin the slaughtered king, the god-king, and 
the beast-king belong to the same region.! They were largely 
identical beings. In Greek mythology as we know it, these 
beings, like other barbarisms, have been in divers ways trans- 
formed; but we can see their traces. 

In Phthiotis, in Thebes, and in Athens we meet well-known 
stories of the usual type: the city is doomed to destruction unless 
one of the royal blood shall die for the people. In Athens 
the last king, Codrus, sacrifices himself. In Thebes the one 
remaining male of the royal line, Menoikeus, sheds his life-blood 
into the dragon’s den. In Phthiotis the stories are more con- 
fused. Phrixus and Hellé fly away, though Hellé ultimately 
dies ; the king Athamas is condemned to die, but always escapes 
at the last moment. In some cases, it would seem, the divine 
king was ἐννέωρος. He was allowed to live for ‘nine seasons’,? 
and then was removed before the sacred force had time to abate. 


1 On the original Greek βασιλεύς or θεός as medicine-man, and the κράτος 
καὶ Bia, or mana, that filled him, see Anthropology and the Classics, p. 75 f. 
The history of this divine 7zaa would well repay a monograph. [{ is always, 
I think, associated with the power of the thunder. In Hesiod, Wiké, Kratos 
and &zé are always at the hand of Zeus; in Call. HY. Jov. 67 it is they who 
made him king; in the Prometheus, of course, they are his ministers. The 
divine kings of the Ptolemaic period regularly possess νίκην καὶ κράτος εἰς τὸν 
ἅπαντα χρόνον, implied in their βασιλεία (Dittenb. Orient. Gr. 90, 35, and note 
102); or κράτος alone, Or σωτηρία καὶ κράτος, OF σωτηρία καὶ νίκη, or the like. 
The same with Roman emperors: Ditt. Or. Gr. 614 init. ; 625, 5; 678 init. 
Id. Sylloge 757. 932, 5. Our own liturgy has familiarized us with a develop- 
ment of this, ἡ βασιλεία καὶ ἡ δύναμις καὶ ἡ δόξα εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας. In earlier 
times Tyrtaeus (4) says it is right that the Kings, honoured of God, should 
lead (ἄρχειν), δήμου δὲ πλήθει νίκην Kat κάρτος ἕπεσθαι, the real divine power 
should belong to the demos! Solon (5) claims that he has given the κράτος 
to the Demos, ‘as much as is sufficient.’ 

2 As to evvewpos, the first thing to notice is that the word means ‘of nine 
seasons’, and leaves us to find out what the ‘season’ is. And as a matter of 
fact it varied in successive ages. First, in the time of the primitive Moon 
Calendar it was a month or a quarter (Eustath. « 390); at another stage 
it was a half-year, a summer or a winter, a mode of reckoning which has left 
its traces even in Thucydides. Last, when the Solar Year was well established, 
it was a year. We shall find traces of all three uses; for the present the 
second is the most important. What, then, is the meaning and the special 
relevance of zine half-years? In the first place, let us realize that when the 
Greeks said ‘every nine half-years’ they did not mean ‘every four-and-a- 
half years’ as we should; they meant every four years. Just as, when 
reckoning in whole years, they called the same period a Penteteris, ‘a 
five-yearly period.’ ᾿Εννέωρος means the same as ‘penteteric’. The special 
importance of the four-year period is, of course, that by a little adjustment, 
and giving the Olympiad 50 and 49 months alternately, it enabled the Solar 
and Lunar years to coincide. Hence the great four-yearly games and festivals. 

Minos, we learn, ἐννέωρος βασίλευε, Διὸς μεγάλου ὀαριστής (τ 179). 1 cannot 


v HUMAN SACRIFICE: DIVINE KINGS 137 


Nine seasons comprised the life of the two vegetation-heroes, the 
Sons of the Threshing-floor, Otus and Ephialtes, who tried 
to scale heaven and were slain (A 311). Nine seasons also, 
strangely enough, formed the limit of each incarnation of the 
divine Minos, the perpetual king of Crete (τ 179). Mr. A. B. 


help suspecting that Minos was a divine king, periodically subjected to 
some ordeal or deposed or murdered ; i. e. the Bull-King was regularly every 
nine ova driven into the Bull-God’s cave and there, really or ostensibly, 
sacrificed. Compare a coin of Magnesia, a great centre of Bull-worship, 
in which the Bull is kneeling at the entrance to a cave, which it seems about 
toenter. It kneels, of course, as a sign of willingness, (Brit, Mus., [onia, 
xix. 9; I owe this reference to Miss Harrison.) 

The evidence is: (1) He ruled for nine oraz, therefore presumably he 
somehow ceased to rule at the end of that period. (2) We have the definite 
tradition that he went up into the Cave ‘every nine years’ to converse with 
Zeus, to receive new commandments (προστάγματα or νόμους) and give an 
account of his stewardship (Plato, 1/zzos, 319 ἃ, Laws, 624 Ὁ, 630d, 632d; 
Strabo, pp. 476, 482, 762, citing Ephorus and Plato). ‘Zeus’ is merely the 
Greek way of naming the Cretan Bull-God. The word ‘years’ has crept in 
with the change of custom in reckoning. (3) This going into the cave of the 
Bull-God can hardly be separated from going into the Labyrinth to be slain 
by Mino-tauros. And the bloody tribute of seven youths and maidens was, 
according to Plutarch, sent to the Minotaur ‘every nine years’ (Viz. 
Theseus, xv). Did they conceivably at some stage die with the king or for 
him? It is noteworthy that the said divine Bull was originally ‘made angry’ 
(ἐξηγριώθη) against Minos by the special wrath of Poseidon (AJ/d. iii. 1. 1, 3), 
which looks as if originally it was Minos himself who was supposed to be 
killed by it. (4) It bears out these suspicions that we have no saga-tradition 
of Minos’s death. (The first is Hdt. vii. 170, how a Minos was killed in 
Sicily and his tomb worshipped.) That is, perhaps, he did not die, or his 
death was a secret. He went into the holy cave and came out rejuvenated 
after his converse with God.—There is, or was a few years ago, an ordeal in 
Lower Nigeria, by which people go up a sacred road to the cave of the ‘ Long 
Juju’, and, if condemned, never come out again. Minos’s mother, Europa, 
who, as a young girl (I cannot find if she was nine years old), was carried off 
by the Bull-Zeus, was also the wife of Asterios, which was the name of the 
Minotaur. Minos himself pursued Dictynna-Britomartis ‘for nine months’ ; 
at the end of which time she threw herself into the sea (Schol., Eur. 2717. 
1130). Has the proverbial ‘nine-year-old ox’ of Hesiod (ΖΦ γα, 436) any 
bearing on this subject? Aristotle, W7s¢. 472.575 Ὁ, says that an ox is at his 
prime when πεντέτης or ἐννέωρος : ‘which is the same thing’. In view of the 
connexions between Crete and Sparta, it is interesting to find that the Ephors 
“every nine years’ watched for falling stars and then sent to Delphi to ask if 
the kings should continue to reign or not (Plut. Ag7s, 11). Cf. also Aetia 
Graeca, 12 (Charila sacrifice), and Paus. viii. 2. 6 (the were-wolves resume 
human shape after nine years). Also Pind. ap. Pl. Zeno 81 Ὁ (p. 133 Chr.) 
ἐνάτῳ ἔτεϊ ἀνδιδοῖ ψυχὰς πάλιν. The way in which these rituals stuck to the 
letter of nine Aovaz while freely varying the meaning of /oré is instructive to 
a student of human nature. 

I subjoin the other passages where the word ἐννέωρος occurs in Homer: in 
« 19 the mystic bag given by the King of the Winds is ἀσκὸς Bods ἐννεώροιο : 
70. 390, Kirké’s enchanted victims are σιάλοισιν ἐοικότες ἐννεώροισιν : εἴ. 
Eustath. ad /oc.: in = 351 Patroclus’ wounds are filled ἀλείφατος ἐννεώροιο, 
which had some magic power, ὡς φαρμακώδη τὴν δύναμιν ἔχοντος says Schol. A, 


138 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC V 


Cook has shown how Minos was a bull-god as well asa king,’ and 
established his connexion with other periodic kings, τον as the 
Olympian victors. It is pretty clear from various evidence—the 
Minotaur itself would be enough—that Minos on certain occasions 
wore the bull-mask which asserted his divine nature. It was the 
same with that other perpetual king, Pharaoh. At the periodical 
feast of the royal marriage Pharaoh was masked as Osiris and 
Pharaoh’s wife as Isis, the deities whose incarnation they were. 
I will not multiply instances from the daemonic masks of tragedy, 
the apotropaic masks of comedy, the totem masks of Red Indian 
tribes, the bull-headed and snake-headed maidens and youths in 
the Mithras ritual. I will not dwell upon βοῶπις πότνια “Ηρη and 
the γλαυκώπιδα κούρην. There can be no doubt that these names 
reach back ultimately to a cow-goddess and an owl-goddess.? And 
we shall see in a later lecture how real is the historical connexion 
between such saga-figures as Agamemnon, Diomedes, Achilles, 
and these part-human, part-animal, part-divine tribal kings. But 
it is just this sort of barbaric bestial haziness that Homer will 
least of all things tolerate. For Homer there are no cow- 
goddesses nor yet cow-headed goddesses, no owl-goddesses nor 
yet owl-headed goddesses; only a goddess in supremely 
beautiful form who takes a blameless interest in cows or is 
attended by a faithful owl. 

And in just the same spirit Homer has drawn sharp and clear 
the dividing iine between men and gods. There are no persons 


1 See Mr. Cook’s remarkable articles in Class. Rev., 1903, and Zeus vol. i. 
pp. 491 f. (Minotaur the Cretan crown prince masquerading on a Bull), 662 ἢ, 
527n. See also Bethe on Minos as the Bull-god of the Kefti (Egyptian for 
‘Cretans’) in RA. Mus. N.F. Ιχν. The saga reflects the fights of the Kefti in 
Attica. 

2. See also Cook on ‘ Animal Worship in the Mycenaean Age,’ /.H.S., 1894. 
‘The custom of wearing a mask of the deity worshipped is common in the 
religions of animal worship, in Egypt, Mexico, the South Seas, and elsewhere. 
Lang, Myth, Ritual, and Religion, ii. 284; ib. 130. Cf. also Moret, Caractére 
religzeux de la Monarchie égyptienne; Dieterich, Mithrasliturgie. The 
main Greek text for Pharaoh is Diod. i. 62. The fabled metamorphoses of 
Proteus into various animals or a tree or fire are explained by the priests : 
ἐν ἔθει γὰρ εἶναι τοῖς κατ᾽ Αἴγυπτον δυνάσταις περιτίθεσθαι περὶ τὴν “κεφαλὴν 
λεόντων καὶ ταύρων καὶ δρακόντων προτομάς, σημεῖα τῆς ἀρχῆς" καὶ ποτὲ μὲν δένδρα 
ποτὲ δὲ πῦρ, ἔστι δ᾽ ὅτε καὶ θυμιαμάτων εὐώδων € ἔχειν ἐπὶ τῆς κεφαλῆς οὐκ ὀλίγα, 
καὶ διὰ τούτων ἅμα μὲν ἑαυτοὺς εἰς εὐπρέπειαν κοσμεῖν, ἅμα δὲ τοὺς ἄλλους εἰς 
κατάπληξιν ἄγειν καὶ δεισιδαίμονα διάθεσιν. The trees and the fire are perhaps 
invented for the sake of the Proteus story in the Odyssey, but the rest of the 
account seems to be true. 


V ABOLITION OF DIVINE KINGS 139 


in the Zad or Odyssey, as there are in the rest of Greek tradition, 
who appear now as one and now as the other. There is a de- 
finite avoidance of the makeshift bridge which satisfied Hesiod : 
‘the divine race of heroes, who are called demi-gods.’ (See Leaf 
on M 23, and Schol. BL, 2dz@.) Kings may be descended from 
gods, and specially favoured by particular gods. But that is all. 
The peasants of the Peloponnese continued long after Homer’s 
time to worship at the altars of a being called Zeus- A gamemnon.! 
They may have been far from clear as to the distinction between 
the God Cronos and his son Pelops at Olympia.? But in the 
LItad Zeus, son of Cronos, is quite definitely a king of gods; 
Agamemnon, son of Pelops, definitely a king of men. There is 
no shade of confusion between them. 

It was a remarkable achievement of the Hellenic intellect, this 
clear realization that a man was not a god, and that it was no 
use calling him so. It needed such clearness of sight, such 
daring, such humanity.* We can see how hard the step was 
when we reflect how small a part of the human race rose to the 
height of following it. Think of the divine honours paid ages 
after this to the Roman emperors. Think of the senate agreeing 
to Caligula’s claim of such honours for himself and his horse.* 
No doubt there were mitigating circumstances in Caesar-worship. 
The divine horse was an admitted eccentricity. Sensible men 


1 T see that Dr. Farnell doubts this; in deference to so high an authority 
I cite my grounds for the statement at greater length: Lycophron, 1123 ff. 
(where Cassandra prophesies ἐμὸς δ᾽ ἀκοίτης Ζεὺς... Σπαρτιάταις... κληθήσεται), 
also 335, 1359ff., and Scholia. Also Clem. ΑἹ. δ χγοίγεῤί. pp. 11, 18, cites 
Staphylus for the worship of ᾿Αγαμέμνονά τινα Δία ἐν Σπάρτῃ. Usener has 
pointed out what looks like an early trace of the same worship in Aesch. 
Choeph. 255 καὶ τοῦ θυτῆρος καί σε τιμῶντος μέγα (cf. also ibid. 358, πρόπολός τε 
τῶν μεγίστων | χθονίων ἐκεῖ τυράννων). This may be ἃ case of the well-known 
sort, where two gods clash until one is made the priest or πρόπολος or 
κλῃδοῦχος of the other, as e. g. Iphigenia was κλῃδοῦχος of Artemis. Agamem- 
non was King of Sparta (Stesich. 39, Simon. 20), and died at Amyclae (Pind. 
P, xi. 32), where Pausanias saw his tomb. 

2 See Mayer in Roscher’s Lexicon, ‘Kronos’: especially ii. 1507 ff. 
Observe that Pelops zs Kronios, and that he also conguered Kronios. Paus. 
Vir 21 ΤΙ: 

3 Of course the making of the god in the first instance may have involved 
a confusion of thought; the god may be only a projection of the ‘mana’ 
of the medicine-king or the medicine-beast, or even simply ‘le désir collectif 
personnifié’. See below, p. 275, note. But the advance remarked in the 
text was nevertheless enormous. 

* Caligula also was an ὀαριστής of Jupiter Capitolinus, exactly like Minos. 
Suet. Calig. 22. 


140 THE RISE ΟΕ THE (GREEK VEPIC ν 


were conscious that the worship was in some sense metaphorical. 
Politicians found it useful for testing and impressing the loyalty 
of a distant oriental population. But the fundamental fact of 
the matter is that such deification of kings did not seem to 
educated Romans a thing unfamiliar or absurd. The old Roman 
kings themselves, as Dr. Frazer has shown, had been in their 
time personifications of gods. The various kings whom they 
had conquered were all gods, the kings of Egypt, of Syria, ot 
Parthia. The old Hellenic spirit was not then alive to testify. 
The half-Greek Alexander and his generals had walked up and 
down in barbaric places, where the old unpurified swamp was 
still lying in the sun, and had caught the contagion of savage 
ideas. La nostalete de la boue laid hold upon them. Alexander, 
who destroyed classical Greece, insisted that he was a god, and 
the son of a divine snake. Demetrius received a semblance of 
divine honour even in Athens. That is just the atmosphere 
which Homer and the spirit of early Hellenism had cleared 
away—one might have hoped, for ever. 

Like other morbid growths of the primitive human mind, these 
deifications of living kings have had some particular develop- 
ments that were beneficent and even splendid. But the verdict 
of sane thought is against them. It is not only that their history 
is written in blood. It is that they are in their very essence 
degrading to humanity. And their abolition during the few 
centuries in which the Hellenic power stood unbroken might of 
itself be taken as a fair measure of the importance of Greece to 
human progress. 


So far, then, the cases which we have taken are instances of 
successful expurgation. The reforming Hellenic spirit has 
ultimately, with what difficulties and against what opposition we 
know not, executed its will. Let us now consider a place 
where it was baffled. Such passages were sure to occur in 
a traditional book. For the first business of all these ancient 
poets was to record history: and at times it happened that 
objectionable facts were clearly and ineradicably fixed in the 
history. The panegyrist of David who compiled our Book of 
Samuel could not ignore David’s treatment of Uriah. The poet 
of Achilles cannot ignore the savagery of his hero’s triumph. 


V EXPURGATION BAFFLED 141 


The origin of the Uriah story in the midst of a tradition so 
greatly modified for the glorification of David is in many ways 
difficult to explain.!. But in the case of Achilles we may take it 
as certain that in some early form of the saga, and even of the 
poem, the ferocity of his revenge was part of his glory. Hector 
did, it is true, by miserable treachery, contrive to kill Achilles’ 
dearest friend. But what a revenge our great Achilles took! 
He tied Hector by the heels to his chariot, and dragged him to 
death : all his friends looked on and dared not interfere. Then 
he had fun with the body in all sorts of ingenious ways day by 
day, till there was nothing left of it. Much the Trojans could do 
to stop him! And as for Patroclus, a round dozen of Trojan 
nobles were slaughtered over his grave. That was how Achilles 
treated his enemies. That kept the dogs in their place. 

Now what was to be done with such an incident as this? To 
Homer—if we may use that name to denote the authors of the 
prevailing tone of the 7/zad—it was all odious and ugly. But it 
was too firmly fixed in the tradition to be denied. A part of the 
story, indeed, could be modified. Hector was saved from torture, 
As we saw earlier, he was killed first, and dragged behind the 
chariot afterwards. But what of the sacrifice of the twelve 
Trojans? Any sacrifice was animportant and lengthy act. The 
ordinary sacrifice of a bull in the Z/ad has five lines allotted 
to it, or ten, if we count in the roasting operations (A 458-67, 
B 421-30). You would expect this sacrifice to have at the very 
least twenty. As a matter of fact it is crowded into a shame- 
faced line and a half! (#175). And that line and a half is 
merely part of another sentence: it has not a whole verb to 
itself. And it is followed by what certainly looks like one of the 
extremely rare phrases of moral condemnation in the Poems; 
‘Yea, his heart devised evil deeds.’ You could scarcely have a 
clearer case of a poet recording a fact against his will. It is ina 
very different tone that the Book of Kings records the human 
sacrifices of the pious Josiah, when ‘he slew all the priests of the 
High Places that were there, upon the altars, and burned men’s 
bones upon them’ (2 Kings xxiii. 20; cf. 1 Kings xiii. 2, where 
the word used is ‘ sacrifice’). 

Even so, however, the fact stands recorded, and so does the 

1 Though see note at end of LectureIV. The Deuteronomists did omit it, 


142 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC V 


maltreating of Hector’s corpse. No other corpse is so treated in 
the Ziad. It is a difficulty like this that brings out the real 
greatness of Homer. The whole of the last two books of the 
TItiad is occupied with the psychological tragedy of this foul 
action of Achilles. 

In the first place there is not the faintest doubt as to the general 
sympathy of the narrative. The gods, the reader, the poet, are 
all at one. There is no exultation in the barbarity : there is only 
shame and regret. I will go further. Of all the thousands ot 
ferocious young soldiers, Greek, Roman, mediaeval, and modern, 
who in their various days have read the //ad and been ordered 
by their teachers to admire it, it is hard to imagine a single one 
rising from these last two books with a feeling that it was a fine 
feat to do as Achilles did, and mutilate your dead enemies. But 
the wonderful thing that Homer does is to make you understand 
Achilles’ state of mind. The cruelties which he practises are 
those ofa man mad with grief, a man starving and sleepless, who, 
when he yields at last, yields in a burst of helpless tears. And 
it makes some difference, also, that Achilles is deliberately 
giving up his own life. He has the special supernatural know- 
ledge that his revenge will be followed immediately by his death. 
He heaps all that he has, as it were, upon the pyre of the friend 
whom his own petulance and pride have caused to die.! 

Homer, with his vibrating sympathy, his amazing language, 
and that fiery splendour of narrative which seems almost to have 
died out of the world when the Z/ad was complete, can carry off 
these deeds of horror, and leave Achilles a hero. Yet, even so, 
Achilles as a subject for poetry, like the actual Achilles of 
legend, paid for these savageries with an early death. It is 
curious how little the Greek poets cared for him. He was the 
uncontested hero of their greatest epic; yet Greek literature as a 
whole tends to pass him by. There is one lost Achillean trilogy 
by Aeschylus, of which it would be rash to speak: there is one 


1 Starving and sleepless for twelve days, Ὡ 31; tears, 2 51off. His own 
death, = 96ff.; cf. his wonderful words to Lycaon, ᾧ 106-13: ‘ Nay, friend, 
die like another! What wouldst thou vainly weeping? Patroclus died, who 
was far better than thou. Look upon me! Am I not beautiful and tall, and 
sprung of a good father, and a goddess the mother that bare me? Yet, lo, 
Death is over me and the mighty hand of Doom. There cometh a dawn of 
day, a noon or an evening, and a hand that I know not shall lay me dead,’ &c. 


Vv ACHILLES: EDUCATION 143 


poignant and clever study of Achilles in Euripides’ /Ahzgenza 
tx Aulis. Late philosophers and pedagogues idealized or 
allegorized him at their pleasure. But he inspired little great 
poetry, and roused little imaginative interest compared with 
lowlier heroes. He was associated with some of the faults that 
Greece most hated, and he had not enough depth and variety of 
character to make him fascinating in spite of them. Even the 
man of many wiles, whose record in so many ways was far from 
stainless—for instance, in that little matter of the arrows—speaks 
much more in accordance with normal Greek feeling. When his 
great victory is accomplished and his wife and house delivered 
from outrage, and the old Nurse is about to shriek for joy, he 
bids her keep her joy in her heart, and refrain and make no cry: 


Unholy is the voice 
Of loud thanksgiving over slaughtered men (x 412). 


One cannot help remembering in this connexion that the Ziad 
in the fifth century occupied a central place in Greek education. 
All well-born youths were trained upon it. And later Attic 
writers speak with enthusiasm of the moral superiority of Homer 
—and when they say ‘Homer’ they chiefly mean the /ad— 
over the other ancient poets. Such is the common way of human 
idealism. You first imagine ideal heroes and reshape your old 
traditions till they yield the patterns that you desire: then, for- 
getting they are your own creation, you contemplate them as 
real historical beings and are kindled into a burning desire to be 
like them. Whether this educational use of the Z/ad began in 
Ionia as early as the seventh century, which is likely enough, or 
whether it only began in Attica in the sixth and fifth, we can 
hardly help supposing that it had some share in these processes 
of purification with which we have been dealing. The hand of 
the schoolmaster certainly seems to have been at work—though 
of course by different methods—in the case of another poet 
much used in education, Theognis. Such parts of his poetry as 
are obviously unedifying are relegated to a sort of appendix at 
the end of the book, and in many MSS. are omitted altogether. 
But our evidence fails us. The use of the 7éad and Odyssey in 

1 Edifying passages from the old Ionic hortatory writers seem to have 


been introduced into Homer. See Miilder, as cited below, Lecture VII, 
p. 186. Also Bréal, Pour mieux connaitre Homere, pp. 14f. 


144 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC V 


education in classical times is a known fact, and a fact which 
must have operated in the way required. It is a vera causa, 
Yet it is quite likely that the educational use itself is also a result 
of some original moral superiority in the traditions of the con- 
quering Northmen.! 

Further consideration of this subject would lead us too far 
afield. I am content for the present moment if I have shown 
the mere fact that there was in the formation of the 7/ad, and to 
a less extent in that of the Odyssey, a strong element of reform and 
expurgation. The tradition of early Greece, vast and tangled in 
its wealth of varied beauty and ugliness as some South American 
forest, was left by the Homeric poets a much cleaner and colder 
thing than they found it. In this result two influences chiefly 
were at work. First, a general humanizing of the imagination, 
the progress of a spirit which, as it loved beauty, hated cruelty 
and uncleanness. Secondly, the remnants of a race prejudice. 
The relations of the Northern and the aboriginal elements in the 
Homeric poems are involved, when you come to details, in 
inextricable unity. But in its origin the ‘Homeric’ convention 
seems to represent some far-off idealized image of the Achaean 
or northern spirit: the spirit of those scattered strong men who 
in their various settlements were leading and shaping the Aegean 
world. The special myths, beliefs, and rites that were character- 
istic of the conquered races are pruned away or ignored, the 
hero-worship, the oracles, the magic and witchcraft, the hocus- 
pocus of purification: all that savours of ‘the monstrous 
regiment of women’, the uncanny powers of dead men, and the 
baleful confusion between man and god. 

Yet race prejudice is not quite the word. It is a race ideal, 
and more than a race ideal. For it finds its main impulse not in 
any maintenance of actual Northern tribes, past or existing, but 
in the building up of something yet unborn. The earlier bards 
had perhaps no name for this thing ; it was only a quality which 
one felt in true Achaioi, Danaoi, or Argeioi. The later poets 
knew it as Hellenism. True, the great division between Hellenes 
and darbaroz is never in so many words expressed in the con- 
ventional language of the Epos. The words are, no doubt, too 


1 See note on p. 263 f. 


v THE HOMERIC SPIRIT 145 


modern. They would break the convention, and are deliberately 
excluded. But the feeling is there so strongly that eventually 
the name cannot be kept out, and it enters, when it does enter, in 
a strengthened and more un-epic form: ‘Pan-Hellenes’ or, 
rather more disguised, ‘ Pan-Achaioi’.! 

Hellenism, as has often been remarked, denotes really not a unity 
of race, but a unity of culture. Through all antiquity the sons 
of Hellén were reckoned according to the spirit, not the flesh. 
And the word ‘Pan-Hellenes’ expresses just this. It implies 
a readiness to extend the great name to all who are willing to bear 
its burden, all who will live as Hellenes and take sides with Hellas. 

Students of early Greek tradition are constantly brought up 
against a certain broad contrast, between what is Homeric and 
what is local. The local religion, the local legend, the local 
feuds between Greek and Greek—these are things for which 
Homer has in general no place. The Pan-Hellenism of Homer 
strikes a reader even at first sight : but it strikes him much more 
keenly when he reflects in what a network of feuds and fears 
and mutual abhorrences the life of primitive communities is 
involved. ‘Thou shalt not abhor an Edomite; thou shalt not 
abhor an Egyptian,’ says the Deuteronomist, breaking down the 
wall of hatred at particular points by definite injunctions. The 
Homeric bards issue no such commands, They strike unnoticed at 
the root of the whole system. They draw into the great orbit of 
the Epos the ancestral heroes of all the Achaioi, Argeioi, Danaoi- 
They show ‘all Greeks’ labouring together, all of them suitably 
idealized, all good men and true. They ignore everything that 
is really tribal and exclusive, all the peculiar local rites, the taboo 
tombs and secret names, which formed the very core of each 
little village worship. They will deal only with such gods as can 
stand publicly in the eyes of all Greece. It was a great attempt, 
and it involved a considerable imaginative sacrifice: But mean- 
time the new nation came into being. It worshipped Zeus 
Hellanios, it attended the great Pan-Hellenic festivals, and there 
in the four-yearly Homeric recitations Hellas found its book.? 


1 TlaveAAnves B 530, Παναχαιοί at least 12 times. 
3. For an instance of the extension of this spirit to the ‘ Homeric’ Hymns 
see Appendix G. 


2760 Ι, 


VI 
THE ILIAD AS A TRADITIONAL BOOK 


Il. EVIDENCES 


Bur let us turn to a question of evidence. I have been arguing 
on general grounds that what we should expect to find in the 
Homeric poems is some form of Traditional Book, which, like 
the Song of Roland, or the Nibelungenlied, or the Pentateuch, 
or even Hamlet or the Covent Garden text of Richard 777, has 
reached its present form by a process of gradual growth and 
constant rehandling. That is what we should expect. And our 
study of the expurgations confirms our expectation. But is 
there in the poems themselves definite evidence to show that this 
is actually what happened? There is: and I will ask you to 
spend some time in considering it. At this point, unfortunately, 
the air begins to thicken with controversy, and controversy 
generally obscures understanding. I propose to argue as little 
as possible, but merely to make a re-statement of some of the 
evidence already observed by various Homeric critics. My case 
will be by no means complete. The evidence of language, for 
instance, to my mind the most fundamental of all, is not suitable 
for discussion in these lectures. But my object all through is 
illustration rather than argument. 

What we require for our purpose will be a series of cases in 
which we already have reason to believe that a change of custom 
took place between the Mycenaean and the Classical ages, that is, 
roughly speaking, between the thirteenth century B.C. and the 
sixth. If the Ziad is, as we have argued, a traditional book, 
modified by succeeding generations, we shall expect to discover 
some traces of this process. Probably we shall find, roughly 
speaking, that on the surface the poem complies with the later 
customs, while deeper down there are marks of the older. For 
it is, by our hypothesis, an ancient poem worked over from time 


VI ARMOUR IN HOMER 147 


to time to suit various new generations, or—to put the same thing 
in another form—a comparatively later poem using masses of 
ancient material. Let me say at once that we shall find nothing 
amounting todemonstration. There is no possibility of demonstra- 
tion in the case. We shall only find a number of comparatively 
small and inconspicuous phenomena which are quite simple and 
normal if the //ad is a traditional book, and extremely puzzling 
if it is not. 


Perhaps the clearest case is the change of armour. The Greek 
of Classical times was a conspicuous figure in his Ionian panoply. 
He was clad in solid metal from head to foot: helmet, breastplate, 
and backplate, small round shield, and greaves, all of metal. 
When Psammetichus, king of Egypt, was driven from his throne, 
he was told by the oracle at Buto to find dronzen men who 
would restore him. He found them in the shape of Ionian and 
Carian mercenaries (Hdt. ii. 152). 


1 Hdt. I. 171 (of Kapes) . . . καὶ ὄχανα ἀσπίσι οὗτοί εἰσι of ποιησάμενοι 
πρῶτοι" τέως δὲ ἄνευ ὀχάνων ἐφόρεον τὰς ἀσπίδας πάντες οἵπερ εἰώθεσαν ἀσπίσι 
χρᾶσθαι, τελαμῶσι σκντίνοισι οἰηκίζοντες, περὶ τοῖσι αὐχέσι καὶ τοῖσι ἀριστεροῖσι 
ὦμοισι περικείμενοι. Hdt. II. 152 ὡς τίσις ἥξει ἀπὸ θαλάσσης χαλκέων ἀνδρῶν 
ἐπιφανέντων... “lavas τε καὶ Κᾶρας. ((γεα 650 B.C.) In view of criticism, let 
me correct some false impressions. It is not part of my case to deny that 
there were round shields and may have been breastplates in Crete or Egypt 
in Minoan times: the evidence is doubtful; it depends on the Zakro seals, 
which are difficult to interpret. The seal (2..S.A. xii. 241) selected by 
Mr. Lang (p. 73) as most conclusive seems to me to represent a person 
of uncertain sex carrying, not wearing, a ritual cope like that worn by the 
leader of the Harvest Procession on the well-known steatite vase from Hagia 
Triada. At any rate it covers the arms, and therefore can hardly be a 
breastplate. But in any case Minoan is not Homeric, οὐδὲ ἐγγύς : it is 
pre-Mycenaean, and Mycenaean is pre-Homeric.—My case is that we know 
of a big-leather-shield-and-no-breastplate period both from the remains 
and the definite statements of Herodotus ; and we know of a classical period 
with small round shields and complete metal body-armour. And both these 
periods can be traced in Homer. So far the argument is archaeological ; 
then comes the philological confirmation, the fact that wherever the ¢hdrér 
occurs in the poems it is always ‘inorganic’ and generally troublesome. 
G. Lippold (AZiinchener archaeologische Studien, 1909, pp. 400-504) ably 
argues that ‘ Mycenaean’ is a misnomer. The big hanging leather shield of 
Homer is the Dipylon shield, which he separates from the Mycenaean 
and connects with the Boeotian. Dipylon shield-bearers often appear on 
chariots, Mycenaean shield-bearers never. 

Mr. Lang, besides his valuable argument about the date of the Homeric 
breastplate, raises interesting questions about the chiton, and why Homer 
does not mention the κύπασσις or archaic bathing-drawers. I will not 
attempt to deal with that question now, but I welcome it, as also the question 
he raises about women’s dress. The general result of such inquiries will be, 


L 2 


148 THE RISE OF THE GREEK, EPIC VI 


Now the warrior of an earlier generation—we will call him for 
convenience ‘ Mycenaean’; but the type lasted much later ; it is 
assumed in parts of Tyrtaeus, and Herodotus conceives it as still 
normal about 650 B.C.—went to battle in a very different state. 
He was not in the least a ‘bronzen man’. He had a leather 
helmet, sometimes perhaps adorned with bits of metal. He may 
have had sometimes a thick waistcoat or jerkin of linen to serve 
for a breastplate, and soft leather leggings in place of greaves. 
But normally he wore only a loin-cloth! and a linen tunic, while 
instead of any corselet or body-armour he used the loose skins of 
beasts, treated in one of two main ways. The common man got 
the best beast-skin he could, the fell of a wolf, a goat, a pard, or, 
if he could afford it, an ox; he tied this skin by the paws round 
his neck and let it hang. Then in battle he caught the lower 
flapping edge with his left hand and held the skin tight in front 
of him. It would keep off stones and arrows and perhaps sword 
cuts, and would give him at least one extra chance of dodging 
the cast of a spear. For he could whisk the skin aside as the 
spear pierced it. 

The chieftain or rich man improved upon this simple defence. 
He had his ox-hide dried and made stiff and held in position by 
cross staves of wood. As to the shape, the hide might be left 
roughly in its natural condition, a sort of oblong; a shield, as 
Homer says, ‘like a tower.’ Such a shield covered the man 
admirably from head to foot. But unfortunately it was a little 
weak. It could be pierced by a spear-thrust. To meet that 
difficulty you could of course increase the thickness. You could 
have two, three, or four hides instead of one. But that increased 
the weight very seriously. Aias is said to have had a shield ‘like 
a tower’ consisting of seven ox-hides and a layer of metal. If 
so, it must have weighed rather more than twenty stone; we 
need not be surprised that it was famous, nor yet that no one else 
would have anything to do with it. But you could strengthen 
the shield without adding to the weight by another device.? It 


in my judgement, that our //zad, on the surface at least, is merely classical— 
it represents the normal expectations of an audience in Athens in the fifth 
century. To them, as to us, a hero dressed in bathing-drawers or a Helen in 
archaic flounces would be ἀπρεπές. (See on Cretan armour Prof. Burrows, 
Crete, pp. 37, 207.) 

1 See also Mackenzie in 2. .S. A. xii (1905-6). 

* This remark I owe to Prof. J. L. Myres, who also suggests that the 


VI MYCENAEAN FIGHTING 149 


can easily be practised on a half-sheet of note-paper. Take a 
piece of the rim of the ox-hide about the middle on both sides, 
a piece about a foot long, pinch the ends of each piece together 
and at the same time draw both pieces inwards. That will make 
the shield bulge out, both vertically and horizontally, till it projects 
into a boss or point in the centre. It will so be stronger in itself; 
it can easily be coated in the centre with a piece of metal; and, 
thirdly, weapons will glance oft from it. The price you pay for 
these advantages is, of course, that you make your shield narrow 
in the middle. This is one reason, says Prof. Myres, why so 
many people in Homer get wounded in the thigh or flank. 

Now this shield was not regularly held on the arm by a strap 
and handle like the later small shields. Its only strap was a long 
one which passed over the left shoulder and under the right arm. 
In the stress of battle a man’s shield-strap ‘sweated about his 
breast’ (B 388), so that evidently there was no breastplate. The 
cross-staves perhaps formed a kind of handle by which you could 
move it to and fro at need—steer your dry cow, as Hector 
expresses it.! But you could, if necessary, let the shield simply 
swing, and advance on your enemy holding a great spear in both 
hands, or two smaller spears, one in each hand. The shield was 
so heavy that the warrior usually went in a chariot to the place 


shields on the ‘warrior Vase’ are very likely Mycenaean shields with the 
staves taken out, folded up for carrying onthe march. They do not fold flat, 
of course, hence the concave line at the bottom. The Dipylon shield is so 
badly drawn that it is hard to be sure about it, but it is Mycenaean in 
general character—large, leathern, suspended by a ¢elamén. The large 
leathern shield has left a great mark on poetic tradition. Protesilaos in the 
legend was buried in his shield; it was therefore Mycenaean. Similarly 
Astyanax in the 7voades is buried in Hector’s shield. Amphiaraus when he 
drove down to Hades was flying from the battle, and had his Mycenaean 
shield hung on his back; a vase-painter of the fifth century (Wzener Vorlege- 
blatter, 1889, xi. 8), not understanding this, makes him—very awkwardly— 
hold a small round metal shield behind his back (see Reichel, Waffen, p. 64). 
The shield in Eur. Vectra, 430-80, shows Mycenaean tradition. In Tyrtaeus 
I think one can show a clash or blending, much as in Homer; this is natural 
enough. In fr. 11 the young Spartan is to stand ἐν προμάχοις . . . μηρούς 
τε κνήμας τε κάτω Kal στέρνα Kal ὦμους | ἀσπίδος εὐρείης γαστρὶ καλυψάμενος ... 
ὑμεῖς δ᾽, ὦ γυμνῆτες, ὑπ᾽ ἀσπίδος ἄλλοθεν ἄλλος | πτώσσοντες μεγάλοις βάλλετε 
χερμαδίοις : a very ‘Mycenaean’ picture. In 12, 26, however, there is ἃ θώρηξ 
and the men fight in lines (φάλαγγες 21). See Wilamowitz, Die Textge- 
schichte der gr. Lyriker, in Abh. der Gottinger Gesellschaft der Wiss., philol.- 
hist. Klasse, N.F. iv. 3 (1900). 

1 yopnoa βῶν | ἀζαλέην, H 238. Herodotus uses the metaphor more 
strongly of the pre-Carian, i.e. Dipylon or Mycenaean, shield: τελαμῶσι 
σκυτίνοισι οἰηκίζοντες (i, 171). 


150 THE RISE) ΘΕ THE GREEK EPIC VI 


where he wished to fight. Arrived there, he dismounted, and 
stood with the shield ‘like a tower’ in front of him, or ‘ edged 
himself step by step forward’ ᾿ (ὑπασπίδια προποδίζων) into striking 
distance, being careful to keep always under cover. Dangerous 
moments were those of getting down from the chariot, or getting 
up again, or turning to retreat. There was also some danger of 
tripping, both when you turned and when you moved forward. 
For your shield-rim was close upon the ground, and you could 
not safely look so far over the top as to see the earth close in 
front of you. When once you were in position, however, the 
cover was excellent, and there ensued what Homer calls a stadzé 
husminé, a ‘standing battle’. If no vital part of your enemy 
showed round the edge anywhere, you entered into conversation 
with him. A happily directed insult might make him start, lift his 
head too high, or expose a piece of his flank, ‘Then you speared 
him. If you were a very strong man, you could try to drive 
your spear clean through all his layers of ox-hide and reach his 
unarmed body. Or you could even, as Hector and Aias some- 
times did, by a blow with a huge stone, knock his shield right 
back upon him and send him flat on the ground beneath it. 

Peculiar and special tactics, as any one can see; and quite 
different from those of men armed with a small shield and 
a breastplate. But now let us observe one particular piece of 
what I may call the normal defensive drill. Suppose an enemy 
threw his spear with all his force against your shield, the proper 
plan, since you could not move the heavy ‘cow’ swiftly about, 
was to edge it as best you could in one direction and yourself 
twist rapidly in the other. ‘Then even if the spear came right 
through your shield, it probably missed you or only grazed 
your side. 

Now what sort of armour, and what sort of tactics, do the 
Homeric poems describe? It ought to be quite easy to say, 
considering how much close description of fighting they contain. 
As a matter of fact, if you consult Dr. Reichel, the discoverer of 
this whole series of facts, he will tell you that the Homeric 
heroes all fight in Mycenaean armour with the large shield and 
no breastplate, except for some few late interpolated passages. 
If you turn to Dr. Ridgeway, he will explain that the heroes all 
have metal breastplates and round shields, except some few 


VI HOMERIC FIGHTING 151 


individuals with ‘Pelasgian’ antecedents. Neither of these ad- 
mirable writers has, I think, faced the fact of the gradual growth 
of the poems.' Each tries to make the poems square with one 
style of fighting or the other, and, when they refuse to do so, 
proceeds to casuistry or violence. That is not a fair way to be- 
have. We must take the poems as they stand. And, as they 
stand, the main impression is pretty clear. The surface speaks 
of the Ionian or Athenian style of fighting, the heart of the 
narrative is something different and more primitive. 

By ‘the surface’ of the poems I mean such parts as the 
formulae of introduction and transition, the general descriptive 
phrases, the inorganic lines and some of the perpetual epithets : 
all these are full of the Men of Bronze. We hear countless times 
of the ‘ greaved Greeks’, of ‘the bronze-clad Greeks’, of ‘the 
clash of men in bronzen breastplates’ (4 448= 0 62), of ‘the 
whole plain blazing with bronze’ (Y 156), of how ‘men’s eyes 
were blinded by the glitter of bronze from blazing helms and 
breastplates, new-burnished and gleaming shields’ (N 341), of 
‘a warrior whose ‘ whole body shone with bronze, like the light- 
ning of aegis-bearing Zeus’ (A 66), or who ‘ gleams with the 
bronze wherein his body is clad’ (M 463, cf. N 191, X 32, 134, 
&c., &c.). It is the Men of Bronze everywhere. The gods who 
watch the battle look down upon the ‘flashing of bronze, men 
slaying and men slain’ (4 83). And not only is it ‘men of 
bronze’ that we find in this sort of passage, but it is the tactics of 
‘men of bronze’, the movement of ordered regiments of infantry 
in line, obeying their officers and making concerted movements, 
like the classical Greek hoflitae. ‘The Trojans came on, like 
lines of waves on the sea, line behind line, flashing in bronze, to- 


1 See Robert, Studien zur Ilias, who makes this same criticism on Reichel 
(chap. i). Also Lippold, 1. c. 

2 ἐυκνήμιδες, Only once χαλκοκνήμιδες, SO that Reichel says the word only 
means ‘ with good gaiters’. But gaiters, even when not hidden behind a big 
shield, are not conspicuous or exciting objects, whereas the bronze greaves of 
a line of men marching would be both, as the legs moved and the bronze 
glittered. An epithet of this sort must be taken from something striking. I 
am informed by the Hon. Oliver Howard that among the Suras, a tribe 
against which he fought in Northern Nigeria in 1907, the cavalry wore 
permanent iron greaves fastened on by a blacksmith so that they could never 
be taken off, and fitted with a blunt spur on the inside of the calf. They 
wore nothing else, except perhaps a loin-cloth. I know of nothing like this 
in antiquity, however. 


152 THE RISE ΘΕ (THE GREEK ERIC VI 


gether with their commanders’ (N 801). The Greelss ‘ advanced 
in silence and in order, fearing their commanders, their hearts 
set upon supporting one another’ (Γ᾿ 1-9, 4 427-32). That is 
the way in which Nestor from time to time exhorts the Greeks 
to fight, ‘so that clan shall support clan, and tribe tribe’ 
(B 362 f.). It is the way which, we are told, the god Ares, as 
a professional, especially commended ; that men should advance 
in Dhalanxes, or lines, in close array, shield touching shield, an 
impenetrable wall (N 126, 130 ff., 145). It is in this way that 
people are said to be going to fight before each great battle be- 
gins, But strangely enough it is not at all in this way that they 
really fight when the battle is fairly joined, in the heart of the 
poem. In the heart of the poem, when the real fighting comes, 
it is as a rule purely Mycenaean. It is essentially a battle of 
Promachoz, or champions. Usually each champion drives forward 
on his chariot, dismounts and stands forth alone behind his big 
shield, to engage in a series of duels. At most two or three 
occasionally form together in a small group to check a rout or an 
advance.! At certain rare moments they drive their chariots into 
the thick of a yielding foe (O 88 f., 348). 

We have illustrated enough already the tactics of these 
Mycenaean Aromachot or ‘champions in the forefront’. But 
the background of the Mycenaean battle deserves a word in 
passing. Behind the great shielded champions there seem to 
have lurked, in the real Mycenaean battle—first, individual 


1 This is perhaps the movement indicated on the small vase from Hagia 
Triada, described by Burrows (p. 38) from Paribeni in Rendiconti, Acc. Linc. 
xii. 324. See A. Mosso, Escursione nel Mediterraneo, Figs. 33, 34. In 
any case the chariots present some difficulties; see Cauer, Grundfragen, 
P, p. 268f. Why is the chief epithet of the chief hero ‘ swift-of-foot ’? Why, 
after the elaborate chariot-scene at his going forth in T 392 ff., does he never 
use the chariot in pursuing the Trojans all through the next three books? It 
is only once mentioned, and then in repeated lines in a simile (Y 499-503 = 
A 534-7 and 169). The only real chariot-battle, in the full sense, is in the 
‘horseman’ Nestor’s reminiscence, A 711-61; cf. his advice about chariot- 
tactics in A 297-309, advice which seems never to be followed in the Z/iad. 
Diomedes also uses his chariot to charge Ares and Aphrodite in E.—I suspect 
that we have a combination of sources; for instance, tradition always gives 
chariots to the heroes of the Thebais, Adrastus, Amphiaraus, Tydeus, &c., 
which might account for Diomedes (Milder, Que/len, p. 72). Again, why do 
27 Trojans have chariots, and only 9 Greeks? For historical reasons, because 
the Trojans are at home on their horse-breeding plain (see p. 36, n. 3), while 
the Greeks have crossed the sea? Or for merely romantic reasons, as Drerup 
ae because it is glorious to fight on foot against chariots? (Drerup, I. p. 
152). 


we. NOT VARIETY BUT CONFUSION 153 


distinguished archers, sometimes crouching behind the shield of 
a promachos in the very front, sometimes taking cover wherever 
it offered; and secondly, an almost unarmed rabble, shooting 
arrows and little darts and stones from the sling or the bare hand, 
making as terrible a noise as they could, and defending them- 
selves with their flapping /azseia. Now the distinguished archers 
are of course present in the Z/zad,! but on the whole the bow is 
somewhat fallen in repute, and, as one might expect, little is said 
of the rabble. We can discern its existence clearly enough. We 
hear how the Trojans in one place come on like flocks of birds, 
screeching as they come (Γ᾿ 2). We have a good many mentions 
of the stones and arrows coming from no specified hand.? But 
in the main those undignified adjuncts of the ancient battle have 
tended to be forgotten or omitted. The later poets were full of 
the pride of Bronzen Men and the tough hand-to-hand death- 
shock of spear and shield, as we hear of it in classical Greek 
history. 

Let us stay a moment at this point. ‘What’, it may be 
objected, ‘is this going to prove? Why should you expect 
a mixed army, collected from all parts of Greece, to be uniform 
in its accoutrement? The army of Xerxes contained Persian, 
Median, and Assyrian soldiers, with the best weapons that the 
century could produce, together with Ethiopians clad in lion 
and leopard skins, and armed with stone-pointed arrows, and 
Sagartians who carried daggers and lassos. The Chinese army 
in the late war against Japan contained some soldiers armed with 
the newest rifles, and some with bows and arrows. Early vases 
combine Boeotian shields with round shields.’ 

Let us distinguish. Of course, the varieties in the armour 
would not prove much. The poet often comments on the 
peculiarities of different races in battle. We hear in II 419 that 
the Lycians wore no wz¢rae to their tunics; in N 712f. that the 
Locrians ‘had no bronze helmets nor round shields nor ashen 


eee Pandaros, Teucer, for example. See Lang, Homer and his Age, 
136 ff. 

2 Arrows, I'79, ΔΊΟΙ, ® 113, Ὁ 313, &c.3 stones, M 154, Π 774: but in 
general scarcely a χερμάδιον is mentioned in the //zad but has its definite 
thrower. I suspect that every big stone lying on the plain of Troy had 
its legend. It was thrown there by Aias or Hector or Aeneas or Diomedes, 
as similar stones in Cornwall have generally been thrown by St. Paul, or 
by the Devil. 


154 THE RISE OF THE, GREEK EPIC VI 


spears; they came with bows, you know (ἄρα), and cords of 
Sheep-gut!’ So we hear that the Dardanoi were ἀγχιμαχηταΐ, 
which seems to mean ‘fighters in dense formation’, like the 
ἀγχεμάχοι Abantes, who advanced μεμαῶτες ὀρεκτῇσιν μελίῃσι, 
‘straining forward with long ash-spears stretched out.’ “Ῥγο- 
fessor Macurdy ' shows that the same formation was practised by 
the Macedonians with the long sarzssa, by the Dardani in Livy, 
and by the Germans in Tacitus. 

There is nothing here to cause difficulty, or to suggest confu- 
sion of dates or places. What makes the difficulty and suggests 
the confusion is that the poets themselves seem not to be 
conscious of the mixture of Mycenaean and ‘Bronzen’ fighting, 
or at least not to mean that the audience shall be conscious. 
The men are, so to speak, advertised as being about to fight in 
one way, and then, without a word of apology, they proceed to 
fight in another. The fact is that, in all parts of the poem, it is 
understood that, unless otherwise stated, each hero is clad in the 
normal armour of the best style of Greek warrior. But in the 
old lays that normal style was Mycenaean, or at least pre-Carian; 
in the editorial parts it was the style of the sixth or fifth century. 

In one or two places an actual correction of the text has been 
made. There must have come a time—after Mr. Lang’s argu- 
ments we must not put it earlier than the age of Pisistratus, and 
for myself I should now put it later—when the whole conception 
of high warfare was wrapped up in these hand-to-hand battles of 
Bronzen Men in full armour. Probably some reciter or editor of 
the /“ad found among his sources lays describing both kinds 
of fighting, and had to blend them together. Of course some 
slight editing was necessary ; many omissions of lines no doubt, 
a few simple and rather mechanical additions. For one thing, 
the heroes, nearly all, find themselves summarily provided with 
corslets, θώρηκες. The notion gives one something of a shock ; 
it is so hard, in the atmosphere of modern print, to understand 
the simple artifices of a Traditional Poem. Yet the fact is there. 
If we knew nothing of archaeology, if we could suggest no 
explanation at all of such a proceeding, we should have to 
suspect that the ¢oréx had been put into the poem by a later 
hand. For, often as it occurs, it is almost always in what is 

1 Troy and Paeonia, chap. 3. 


VI NOT VARIETY BUT CONFUSION 155 


called an ‘inorganic’ line. That is, the phrasing is such that it 
can be dropped straight out without any injury to grammar, 
sense, or metre. This is too extraordinary a state of things to be 
the result of mere coincidence.! 

To illustrate what is meant by ‘inorganic’, let us take a fairly 
innocent example. There is a passage twice repeated describ- 
ing the first clash of battle :— 

Together they dashed their ox-hides, together spears and 

rages of men 

[Clad in bronzen corslets, and bossy shields] 


Came one against another, and a great turmoil arose. 
4 447 i= O60 ΠΣ 


The line in brackets is inorganic. It does no great harm, 
except that one does not quite see the difference between the 
‘ox-hides’ and the ‘shields’. But drop it out, and sense, 
grammar, and metre are as complete as before. There are 
many such lines scattered about the poems, now here, now there, 
and the fragments of papyri which have come down to us from 
the second and third centuries B.C. often show such lines in places 
where our texts omit them, and sometimes omit them where our 
texts have them. 

Sometimes the inorganic breastplate-line does actual harm. 
There are two identical passages where a man performs the 
sleight mentioned above.?,_ An enemy’s spear comes through his 
shield, but, standing well back from the shield, he twists aside 
and the weapon grazes past him. I translate line by line :— 

Right through the shining shield the strong spear came 

[dud drove heavily* through the richly-wrought corstet | 


And straight on beside his flank it cut through his tunic, 
That spear did: but he twisted aside and escaped black death. 


ΤΑ curious obstacle in the way of further analysis is the fact that we do 
not know the derivative or original meaning of the words θώρηξ, θωρήσσεσθαι. 
The verb is fairly common in the poems and was taken in classical times to 
mean ‘to put on a corslet’, though that is hardly its original meaning, and 
there are many passages it does not suit (B 526, 587, 818; Π 218, cf. 133, &c.; 
see exx. in Ebeling). Reichel thought θώρηξ was a general word meaning 
‘ protection, clothing’, afterwards specialized to a particular kind of protection. 
Another suggestion is that the verb means ‘to make oneself bold’, and so ‘to 
prepare for battle’; this suits most of the Homeric passages, and accounts 
for the slang fifth-century meaning, ‘to get drunk’. 

2 T 358, Paris; H 252, Hector: cf. A 436, Sdkos; and A 136, Menelaus. 

5. ἡρήρειστο, ‘was pressed,’ or ‘driven with weight’, τὸ βίαιον τῆς πληγῆς 
παραδηλοῖ τῷ τραχεῖ τοῦ ῥήματος, Schol, BL. 


156 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC VI 


Without the bracketed line the sense is clear. But with it? 
Does not every reader feel some difficulty ? You can twist aside 
from a spear that is coming through your shield, but not 
from one that has ‘driven heavily’ through your breastplate. 
Doubtless the audience understood it as a pluperfect: ‘he had 
twisted aside.’ That is quite possible Greek. He had twisted 
just before the spear struck, so the spear struck the very edge of 
his corslet and, strange to say, instead of glancing off ‘drove’ 
through. Sit down with a good will and you can imagine ways 
in which, with exactly the right kind of corslet, such a thing 
might conceivably happen: for of course the poets who recited 
the Z/ad would never leave a stark naked impossibility. Only 
the thoréx can never be the real metal breastplate of ἀνδρῶν 
χαλκεοθωρήκων. But how much simpler it would be with that 
thorex-line away! It occurs thus four times, making always the 
same kind of difficulty. 

There is an arrow in 4 134 ff. whose performances are 
described at great length, and very puzzling they are. Pandarus 
had shot at Menelaus, and Athena was protecting him. She 
brushed the arrow aside 


And herself directed 12 where the clasps of his girdle 

All-golden joined and a double protection met it. 

Down dropped the bitter arrow on the fixed girdle, 

And on through the cunning girdle it flew, 

| And τῇ drove heavily through the richly-wrought corstet| 

And through the zzzfvé which he wore to protect his flesh, 
a fence against darts, 

Which was his greatest defence ; right on through that it went, 

And just grazed the man’s flesh, &c. 


Read this without the bracketed line and it is fairly clear. We 
may at worst be a little puzzled by the exact relation between the 
mutré, or waistbelt, and the zés¢ér or girdle. Later on (185 ff.) 
Menelaus is reassuring his brother about the wound :— 


The keen bolt did not fix in a vital spot; the flashing 
girdle warded it off, and lower down the loin-cloth and 
mutré wrought by smiths. 


He makes no mention of any breastplate, but says it was the 
girdle that saved him; he is able to say this because he has just 
(v. 151) Zooked—apparently by pushing back the belt—and seen 


VI SUPERPOSITIONS OF ARMOUR 157 


that the string and barbs of the arrow are outside his flesh. All 
is reasonably clear. 

But now read the passage with the thorex-line in, and all is 
confusion. The arrow went right through his breastplate. 
What did the clasps of the girdle matter if there was a solid 
metal corslet there ἢ How could Menelaus see the wound? Why 
is there so much talk about the piercing of the girdle, and ‘ the 
mitré which was his greatest defence’, and not a word about the 
much more remarkable piercing of the breastplate?! Other 
awkwardnesses occur as one studies the passage: and they all 
disappear with the removal of one inorganic line. 

These superpositions of armour upon armour are not in- 
frequent in our MSS. of early Greek poetry, though we must 
always remember that, if a bard liked to have two versions of 
a description or a metaphor in his private book, it does not 
follow that he used both when he was reciting. One small case 
was noticed by the Alexandrians. We are told of the archer 
Paris in I'17 that he ‘fought in front, with a pardskin on his 
shoulders and a bending bow’, the natural accoutrement for an 
archer, who needs both his hands. Then follow the lines (18-19) 

And sword : and brandishing two spears tipped with bronze 

He was challenging all the Argives to battle. 

Zenodotus, and perhaps Aristarchus too, deleted these lines. 
No doubt rightly. The two spears destroy the picture and 

1 Mr. Lang bravely tackles the difficulties of this passage, and offers the 
explanation that the arrow went, not through the /Aé7éx, but between the two 
parts of the thorex in the narrow open space in front. Athena had, in fact, 
by mistake, directed it to the one dangerous spot! (World of Homer, p. 76.) 

I cannot help suspecting that the μίτρη also is interpolated here, or rather, 
that there has been a contamination of two sources, in one of which it was 
the μίτρη, in the other the double thickness of the girdle that saved him. It 
is worth observing that the Oepné-line makes a slight grammatical awkward- 
ness wherever it occurs: it brings in a καί clause between μέν and δέ. 
Possible language: but odd that it should occur always! Apart from the 
above passages the making of the //é7éx plays a curiously small part in the 
Armour-Making, = 478-613; 133 lines are given to the shield, one to the 
théréx, one to the greaves, two to the helmet. That is, the shield was 
originally all that mattered much. And in Υ 259f. Achilles does seem rather 
to forget that he has a breastplate. Again, in the great passage describing 
Patroclus’ death, II 8o1 ff., Apollo, by a blow with the flat of his hand, makes 
Patroclus stagger, so that his helmet falls off and he drops his shield. That 
originally left him unarmed; but the bard who armed him with a breastplate 
has had to add the disastrous line 804: ‘And the Lord, the son of Zeus, 


Apollo, also unbuckled his breastplate!’ (λῦσε δέ of θώρηκα ἄναξ Διὸς υἱὸς 
᾿Απόλλων). 


158 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC VI 


would prevent Paris from using his bow. [{ is interesting, too, to 
see what happens later when Paris has to fight a duel in full 
armour with Menelaus. He borrows the necessary breastplate 
from Lycaon (I° 330-8) and ‘takes’ a sword and a spear. The 
lines are, as usual, carefully arranged so as to avoid a direct con- 
tradiction with the previous passage. But it is worth observing 
two facts: a Papyrus (Hibeh 19) of the third century B.C. has 
three additional lines here, describing armour, while Zenodotus 
on the other hand deleted two of these in our text. We do not 
know his reasons: possibly he only meant to delete the sword 
and spear in one place or the other. But we see his method, 
and can make out from it how an ancient bard or editor avoided 
contradictions. 

A very clear superposition can be seen in Hesiod’s Shield of 
Heracles (Asis, 139-320). The shield gives its name to the 
poem, and has 180 lines of description, the rest of the accoutre- 
ment sixteen. But thisisnot all. Apparently in the groundwork 
of the poem the hero had a Mycenaean shield for practically his 
whole defence. Then, as in Achilles’ case (see note, p. 157), 
other armour is added. But Heracles in tradition was represented 
not only as a hoplite ; he was also an archer, also a korunétés or 
club-bearer. Consequently in Hesiod, as the text now stands 
(A sfzs, 122-38), he wears, all at the same time, greaves, breast- 
plate, and helmet ; an iron club; a quiver and arrows; a spear, 
and a Mycenaean shield !- The explanation in its general lines 
would seem to be that bards had varying forms in which they 
used to recite the battle of Herakles and Kyknos. In one 
Herakles had a club and arrows, in another a Mycenaean shield 
and spear, in another a full panoply. Some person in his ‘ book’ 
had notes of the alternatives, but when the book was published 
the alternatives were added together.' 

Before leaving this subject, there are two points we should 
notice for the sake of their historical significance. In the first 
place, while the breastplate and shield have been inserted almost 
all through the //zad, there is no clear trace of them in the 
Doloneia (K) nor yet in the Odyssey. K, we have reason to 
believe, was a separate poem and not inserted in the Z/ad till 
a late date ; how late we shall discuss in Chapter XI. The breast- 


* Cf. Deiters de Her. Scuti Descriptione, pp. 59, 399. 


VI UNREALIZED EPITHETS 159 


plate-inserter would seem to have done his work before K was 
incorporated. In the Odyssey there was of course less reason to 
revise the armour, as the military interest is much slighter than 
in the Zzad. But this absence of the breastplate is another 
instance of the fact we have noticed before, that the Odyssey 
seems to have been altogether less worked over, expurgated, and 
elaborated than what many books still persist in calling without 
qualification ‘ the older poem’. 

The second point is an observation on the epic style. The 
introduction of the breastplate, on almost any conceivable theory, 
makes, not indeed an absurdity, but at least some awkwardness, 
some blurring of the presentation. The confusion of two styles 
of fighting does the same. What we have to realize is that, like 
most ancient poetry, the //zad produces its effect not by accuracy 
of detail but by a broad emotional sweep. It does not stimulate 
our powers of close attention as do, for instance, the battle-scenes 
of Tolstoy: it rather hypnotizes them by its rush and splendour 
and stately music. We shall dwell on this characteristic more in 
detail in Chapter IX ; for the present we may note one further 
instance of it. A mark of the epic style is, as we all know, the 
conventional epithet. All objects of interest have descriptive 
adjectives habitually attached to them, and among such objects 
are, of course, shields. Now you would expect, if the poet 
wished to give a clear conception of what he was describing, 
that the epithets would show at once whether a particular shield 
was conceived as the great Mycenaean tower of ox-hide or the 
small round metal targe of later Greece. But in fact it is not so. 
When indeed a shield is called χάλκεον, ‘bronzen,’ there is a 
strong presumption that it is of the later type: when it is 
ἀμφιβρότη or ποδηνεκής, ‘man-enveloping’ or ‘ reaching to the 
feet’, it is of the earlier. But as regards the greater part of the 
epithets scholars differ. Reichel and Leaf try to make as many 
as possible suit the Mycenaean shield. Ridgeway does the 
opposite. What is clear is that shields which must from the 
tactics have been Mycenaean, which are, for instance, large 
enough to cover a man from head to foot, are called ‘ round’ or 
‘even in every direction’ or ‘ orbed’ or ‘ bossy ’—words which 
at first sight seem to apply much more naturally to the later 
shield.! 


f 
1 Βὔκυκλος, κυκλοτερής, πάντοσ᾽ elon, ὀμφαλόεσσα. 


160 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC VI 


It is just the same with the geography. Almost every 
traveller who examines the plain of Troy or the isle of Ithaca 
identifies the various landmarks to his own satisfaction, but the 
identifications are all different. Let any reader study, for instance, 
the discussions by Leaf and Robert about the position of the 
Scamander. Both are quite first-rate investigators. They differ 
completely as to the lie of the river, and only agree that the one 
definite statement into which the poems are betrayed, that the 
Simois and Scamander join their streams (E 774), is a mistake 
and an interpolation. 

A result like this cannot be attained by accident. It is a matter 
of deliberate skill, this subtle avoidance of detail so as to con- 
centrate interest on the central impression. In that respect it is 
closely parallel to the use of types instead of portraits in classical 
art ; but the artistic method may well have grown through his- 
torical causes. <A simplification of issues, a sweeping rejection of 
the sort of detailed fact which is easily forgotten or which may 
suit One reciter but give trouble to the next, a determined loyalty 
to the broad poetic convention, undismayed by research and 
untainted by personal idiosyncrasies: these are principles which 
naturally suit the work of the ‘ Homeridae’ in carrying on by 
corporate efforts a long-lived poetical tradition. 


Let us briefly run through some other cases where the changing 
customs of different ages have left their marks upon the poems. 
There is the change from bronze to iron. The excavations have 
produced no iron at Mycenae, and only two little lumps at Troy. 
No weapons of iron have been found in the pre-Hellenic remains 
anywhere. And on this subject the epic tradition is very clear 
and vigorous. Bronze is the conventional metal of war: Ares 
himself is χάλκεος, ‘ bronzen,’ and ‘ the bronze’ proverbially means 
‘the sword’. Iron is known as a rare and very hard material, 
difficult to work, but suitable for ploughshares, for clubs, for 
arrow-heads, for axes.’ It is only now and then by accident that 
a poet drops into using ‘ iron’ for a sword or spear, as we should 
use ‘steel’. ἃ Antilochos is afraid lest Achilles should ‘cut his 
throat with the iron’ (3 34). Slaughtered oxen ‘ writhe about 


1 Hesiod also thinks of iron in connexion with work rather than fighting. 
Erga 150 χαλκῷ δ᾽ ἐργάζοντο, μέλας δ᾽ οὐκ ἔσκε σίδηρος. On the antiquity 
of iron see Montelius in Praehistorische Zeitung, 1915, esp. pp. 304 f. (Egypt 
1300-1200, Troad c. 1100, Central Europe 1000-875 B.C.). 


i 


VI BRONZE AND IRON: BURIAL 161 


the iron’ (¥ 30). So far we might be dealing with a ‘ transi- 
tional’ age in which iron was just coming into use as a new metal; 
but then comes twice over the proverbial phrase, ‘iron itself 
draws a man on’—a weapon is a temptation (7 294,713). Such 
a saying would only be current in an age to which iron weapons 
had been long familiar. Of course, though these mentions of iron 
show clearly that the writers knew of iron weapons, the general 
use of ‘bronze’ and ‘bronzen’ is no sign that the writers still 
used bronze weapons. The memory of a bronze age happens to 


_ have stamped itself on the language of poetry. That is all. 
, All Greek poetry was archaistic in language because it was 


permeated by a sense of style. It felt that modern words and 


\ phrases were out of tone with the heroic past. Swords are 


spoken of as ‘ bronze’ down to the latest times of the Greek epic, 
when such a thing as a bronze sword had perhaps not been seen 
for centuries, 


More complex is the treatment of funeral rites. Burial was 
at all times the usual Greek custom, but the flaming pyres of the 
great Northmen of the Migrations lived in tradition, so the 
Homeric heroes are burned. Yet both story and language are 
pervaded by faint memories of a still earlier splendour, when 
Mycenae buried and embalmed her kings.1 Hector was not 
burned till the twenty-second day after his death. Achilles 
himself was not burned till the eighteenth (2 31, 413, 665, 785: 
w 65). Surely those touches come from a time when embalming 
was practised. The actual word which meant ‘preserve’ or 
‘embalm’ (ταρχύειν) is used in Homer to denote the ordinary 
burying of burned ashes. This is ἃ clear case of survival, though 
sometimes, from its very inappositeness to mere burial, the word 
gathered to itself a metaphorical suggestion of ‘ preserving’ the 
dead man’s memory. ‘His brethren and kindred will preserve 
him with a mound and a pillar: for that is the honour of the 
dead’ (II 456, 674). The honey once used for embalming is 

1 On the gradual change from bronze to iron and burial to burning in Crete 
see Burrows, pp. 100 f. Even in classical times kings who died abroad 
were embalmed: e.g. Alexander, Agesipolis, Agesilaus. It is interesting 
to note that in Scandinavia the general testimony of early writers put burning 
before burial—the reverse of the truth. See above, p. 74, note. Dorpfeld 


believes in a combination of the two, Compves rendus du Congrds Archéol. a 
Athénes, 1605, p. 161. But see Drerup, I, p. 160. 


2760 M 


162 THE RISE “OF THE (GREEK EPIC VI 


still vaguely associated with the last rites, though its meaning has 
been forgotten. When Patroclus was burned upon a pyre they 
set leaning against the bier two great jars of honey and unguents 
(¥ 170). And Achilles himself was burned ‘in raiment of the 
gods and plenteous unguents and sweet honey’ (67). The 
honey and unguents were useless: but man was reluctant to stint 
his beloved dead of any honour that he had once given him. 
There is a very interesting development in the forms of wor- 
ship. The oldest Greek worship, like the Semitic, seems to 
have had no temples and no graven images. You did not make 
a god, at least not consciously. You found him: found him 
dwelling in some strange rock, some ancient tree, in the water 
that came from unknown depths and made the earth fertile. 
You found him in the pillar that supported your dwelling, but 
might fall, if angered; in the battle-axe that fought for you so 
bravely, but might at any moment wilfully break or miss its aim 
or turn in your hand and betray νοι. And where you found 
him you worshipped, and gave him sacrifice. Hence come the 
‘pillars and high places’, the Hebrew 4dmo¢th and Greek domoz. 
At later stages you marked off a little space around the divine 
object as specially sacred or haunted: this was a Zemenos, a 
Precinct. Later still, as the faithful proceeded to make offerings 
to the god at this precinct, you must needs have a resident priest 
to act as caretaker ; and eventually, since, in spite of all the most 
appalling curses on sacrilege which society could devise, the 
offerings, hung on the tree or set in the crannies of the rock, 
became too great a temptation to passers-by, it was best in the 
end to build a properly walled house for the god and his belong- 
ings to dwell in. How the images of the god arose it is not 
clear. Dr. Reichel? believed that in general thrones came before 
images. You found on some rock or high place some sign of 
the god’s habitation, a place where he sat or stepped or the like, 
You improved the seat for him; in your temple you made a still 
better seat, and eventually you put an image of the god himself to 


1 See especially Evans, Mycenacan Tree and Pillar Cult, in J. H. S. xxi; 
R. Smith, Religion of Semites, pp. 97,135, &c.; ΝΥ. M. Ramsay on Anatolian 
Religion in Dict. 47b/., extra volume. Of course the combination of ‘ani- 
conic’ and ‘iconic’ forms is common in later Greek religion: Pro/egomena, 
pp. 18 ff., and ASHERAH in Eacyc. Bibl. 

2. Vorhellenische Gotterculte. 


VI TEMPLES AND ALTARS 163 


sit there. The image would always serve an important purpose. 
For the very simplest way of getting a god to do something was 
to have an image of him and make the image do it. The chief 
difficulty lies perhaps in the transition from the real fetish to the 
mere imitation or image. I find it difficult to see how a purely 
artificial image can originally have been worshipped except as 
an imitation of something already known or supposed to exist. 
Our early Greeks, driven out and cut off from their natural holy 
places, would be reduced to making with theirown hands imitations 
of the god whom they had left behind. 

Now it is clear that during the greater part of the 7/ad and 
Odyssey worship is carried on at High Places or altars in the 
open air. ‘We were gathered round a spring by the holy altars, 
under a beautiful plane-tree, where bright water ran’: so says 
the Ziad of the sacrifice at Aulis, where appeared the wonder 
of the birds and the snake (B 305, cf. Θ 238 f.). So in the 
Odyssey (¢ 162) the sight of Nausicaa reminds Odysseus of the 
young palm-tree which he saw ‘growing beside Apollo's altar’ 
at Delos. It did not grow indoors. You hear normally, not of 
the Temple of any god, but of the ‘ very beautiful oak of aegis- 
bearing Zeus’ (E 693, H 60, ἑ 328, 7 297): of ‘Athene’s grove 
beside the way, all of poplars; and spring water runs through 
it, and meadow-land is all around’ (¢ 291): of a grove of 
Poseidon, a grove and altars of the Nymphs (B 506, ¢ 200, p 210: 
cf. v 278). 

Then occasionally we hear of a zemenos, a precinct fenced off 
from common life. We hear twice of the ‘marble threshold of 
the Archer Apollo in rocky Pytho’ (I 404, θ 80): and lastly, 
some seven times in all, we hear of definite temples. In Z there 
is a full description not only of a temple and the worship therein, 
but of a definite seated statue of the goddess Athena, on whose 
knees a robe is to be laid, exactly as was done at the feast of the 
Panathenaea, at which the poem itself was being recited. Is not 
that a ritual centuries later, one asks, than the sacrifice by the 
spring at Aulis? And observe a curious point. Chryses, in 
the*first book<of the χάσω, is a very antique figure, not exactly a 
priest, but rather a' professional ‘cursing man’, or aréér, like 
Balaam, son of Beor, in the Book of Numbers. And naturally, 
when he performs his sacrifice, he does so (A 446 ff.) at an altar 

M 2 


164 THE RISE: OF ‘THE GREEK EPIC VI 


in the open air. Yet in the introductory prologue he is made to 
cry to his Mouse-God with the appeal, ‘If ever I roofed for thee 
a gracious temple’ (A 39). It is the same phenomenon which 
we noticed in the case of the armour. The writer of that line did 
not observe, or did not choose to observe, that in his original there 
had been no temple, only an altar. To him and his audience 
an altar implied a temple, so he took the temple for granted. 

It is the same with another social change, affecting marriage 
customs. In the primitive ages of Greece, as Aristotle has 
remarked (Po/. 1268 b), ‘men carried weapons and bought their 
women from one another.’ That is, the suitor paid a price, 
normally calculated in oxen, to the father of the bride, who thus 
became her husband’s property. In classical Greece the custom 
was just the opposite. The father gave a sum of money with 
his daughter to induce the suitor to marry her. Speaking very 
broadly, this means that in the early times there were not enough 
women for the marriage market, in the later times too many. 
It would seem that the first custom arose in an age when, owing 
to dire poverty and continual wars, men hesitated a good deal 
about rearing their children at all, and especially were reluctant 
to burden themselves with daughters. There is something 
touching in the frequency with which during the heroic timés 
you find names of women compounded from dows, an ox. Oxen 
were the gold currency of the time, and these names seem 
perhaps to express the excuse which the parents made to them- 
selves for venturing to rear the useless female child.1. The real 
reason was simply that they could not bear to kill it. But they 
would never allege that. It is not the way with the human race 
to avow such motives. Weare much too shy. No doubt their 
neighbours and the less agreeable of their elder relatives con- 
sidered it extravagant of them, foolishly sentimental or ostenta- 
tious. Well, maybe it was: but after all perhaps the girl 
would bring in a good price some day: so they called her 
Alphesiboia, zzzner of kine, Phereboia, bringer-in-of-kine, 
Polyboia, worth many kine, or Stheneboia, Periboia, Eériboia, 
Meliboia, and the rest of the names, 


1 Cf. Letter in Witkowski fistulae Privatae (58 = Pap. Ox. 744) from a 
man to his wife: ‘if it isa boy, rear it; if a female, destroy.’ Apollod. 476, 
3, 9, 2 (Araddyrns) ὁ πατὴρ ἀρρένων παιδῶν ἐπιθυμῶν ἐξέθηκεν αὐτήν. 


vI DOWRIES, HOUSES 165 


Now the poems as a rule maintain this older conception of the 
marriage bargain. Hector bore his bride ‘out from the halls 
of Eétion, when he had paid countless bride-gifts’ (X 472). 
Iphidamas was slain before he brought home his bride, and ‘ had 
no joy of her, though he gave a great price’ (4 243). Othryoneus, 
the suitor of Cassandra, gave his services in the war instead of a 
bride-gift (N 366: cf. Χ 289). Hephaistos in the Odyssey, when 
Aphrodite is false to him, vows that he will keep her in prison 
till her father returns all the bride-gifts, ‘ yea, all that I put in his 
hand for the sake of his dog-faced maiden’ (θ 319). There are 
special exceptions which perhaps merely prove the rule. Old 
Altes gave a great dower to his daughter Laothoé when she 
married Priam (X 51). Agamemnon, among the gifts with 
which he vainly sues Achilles, offers to give him one of his | 
daughters, not only without exacting a bride-gift, but giving her 
a dowry as well (I 146 ff.). There is also an intermediate stage 
in which the gifts are paid, not to the bride’s father, but to the 
bride herself.1_ They seem not so much a real gift as a proof of 
the suitor’s power to maintain a wife. 

Now, so far, the evidence might be interpreted in either of two 
ways. It might denote a long progress of time during which 
customs changed, or it might point merely to an age in which 
the custom varied according to circumstances. Two passages 
in a late part of the Odyssey decide the question (8 194, α 278). 
‘Let Telemachus bid his mother go back to her father’s house. 
And the folk there shall make a marriage-feast and furnish eédva 
in plenty, such as are meet to go with a dear daughter. A 
dowry is meant; but the word used is éedva, ‘ bride-gift.’ The 
writer of the lines was accustomed to the later practice of φερνή 
or προίξ, ‘dowry, and mistook the meaning of éedva because his 
generation had forgotten the custom (cf. also β 53). 

It is the same with the question of the Homeric house. One 
reason for the divergent theories of scholars about that elusive 
object has been that they tried to work with only one form of 
house, and there are really at least three. The house of Odysseus 
at the end in the Battle with the Suitors stands by itself. It is a 

* €159: cf. Schol. Π 178: also cf. Aesch. Prom. 559 ἔδνοις ἄγαγες Ἡσιόναν 
πείθων. The code of Hammurabi has marks of an intermediate stage, 
practically equivalent to this. The suitor paid a bride-price to the father, 


and the father also gave a dowry which normally included the return of the 
bride-price, but did not always do so. See Ham. 160, 163, 164. 


166 THE RISE @F THE GREEK EPIC VI 


Mycenaean palace, not unlike Tiryns,as Prof. Myres has shown.! 
But the normal house of both the Z/ad and Odyssey is quite 
different. There seem to have been two types of house in the 
Aegean in early times, the Cretan or Southern palace and the 
Hellenic or Northern one-roomed ‘Megaron’. The Cretan 
palace consists of countless rooms leading one out of the other, 
and a whole structure so complicated that it has perhaps given 
rise to the story of the labyrinth. Its main rooms tended to have 
the entrance door or doors on the long wall of the room so that 
the southern sun came in through the broad opening. Conse- 
quently they had no fireplace.2. The Hellenic house was like a 
modern shed or a Greek temple 272 aud¢is, an oblong building 
with a door at the narrow end, a porch in front, and a fireplace 
in the centre of the big hall, which was called szegaron or thalamos. 
In the palaces of Greece proper, Mycenae, Tiryns, and Arne in 
Lake Copais, this northern megaron has been combined with the 
‘labyrinthine’ scheme of the Cretan palaces. But in the Ziad 
and Odyssey the houses are normally one-room halls. The master 
and mistress live in the megaron in the daytime and sleep there 
at night; strangers are invariably given a bed in the porch just 
outside the front door. That is where Telemachus is put when 
staying with Nestor and with Menelaus (y 395-406, ὃ 296-307) ; 
Odysseus with Alcinoiis (η 228-347), and when he is a stranger 
in his own house (υ 1); Priam with Achilles (2643-50). Grown- 
up sons and daughters have separate ‘halls’ or ¢halamo?z built 
for them close by (y 413, B 2-5). When Hector goes to find 
Paris in his thalamos (Z 321 ff.), he finds Paris cleaning his 
armour, and Helen with her handmaids spinning, all in the same 
room; and the room is certainly the place where Helen and 
Paris slept. When the gods are summoned to Hephaestus’ house, 
they stand in the porch and see from there his bed with chains 
like spider-webs drawn round it (@ 304, 325). And Alcinous 
speaks of the night being long; ‘it is not yet time to sleep in the 
hall’ (A 373). 

That is the normal Homeric practice. But there are other 
passages where the master and mistress have a separate bedroom 
away from the hall; Penelope, in particular, and certain young 


1 J. H. S., vol. xx, and Monro’s Odyssey, Appendix VI. 
* There is a central hearth in the second city at Troy—perhaps owing to 
the climate, perhaps to some exceedingly early influx of Northerners. 


VI CONCLUSION 167 


girls dwell in ‘ well-wrought upper-chambers’. And here, as 
before, the poet who brings in the later use does not notice that 
he is contradicting an earlier use. So Helen and Menelaus go 
to rest in the usual way ‘in the inward part of the lofty hall’; 
but in the morning Helen comes out of her ‘ fragrant high-roofed 
bower’ (6 304, 310, 121). In the case where Achilles puts the 
aged Priam to sleep in the porch, the later poet seems to be 
troubled at such apparent lack of hospitality, and invents a reason, 
which no commentator has ever succeeded in understanding, for 
not asking him tosleep properly inside (2 643-76). Apparently 
he did not understand the custom which he found implied in 
his source. 

Other evidence could be added to this:! evidence from the 
treatment of the gods, a most curious subject; from the law 
about guardianship of a widow; from land tenure, government, 
and, most important of all, from the changes and misunderstand- 
ings of linguistic forms. All are involved in a network of small 
but ever-thickening difficulties as long as we try to regard the 
poems as the work of one man or one age. All begin to clear 
and become intelligible as soon as we recognize what the Poems 
really are. They represent, not the independent invention of 
one man, like some modern books, but the ever-moving tradition 
of many generations of men, like almost all ancient books. They 
are wholes built up out of a great mass of legendary poetry, re- 
treated and re-created by successive poets in successive ages, 
unities which have not perfectly assimilated the sources from 
which they draw. 

1 Cases of conscious avoidance by Homer of ‘modern’ subjects are given 


by Bréal, Pour mieux connaitre Homére, pp. 7-11: 6. g. writing, statues, 
paintings, money. Cf. also Drerup, I, chap. iv. 


NOTE.—My discussion of the armour is based chiefly on Reichel, Home- 
viscthe Waffen, Leaf’s Appendices to his edition of the //zad, and Robert’s 
Studien zur Ilias; Lippold’s valuable article (see p. 147 note) only came 
to me while the second edition was in the press. The passages about funeral 
customs, bronze and iron, temples and dowries, are taken chiefly from 
P. Cauer’s admirable Grundfragen der Homerkritik (third edition, 1921, 1923). 
Some remarks also are due to Finsler’s Homer, and of course Helbig 
(Homerische Epos aus den Denkmalern erkiadrt) and Tsountas and Manatt. 
From the ‘unitarian’ side the best discussion of the armour is that of 
Andrew Lang in Zhe World of Homer and Homer and his Age. On houses 
I would specially refer to Noack, Homertsche Paldste and Ovalhaus und 
Palast in Kreta, and the four articles by Mackenzie on Cretan Palaces in 
the Annual of the B. S. A., xi-xiv. Cf. also Ridgeway in the Athenaeum for 


168 THE RISE. (OF: THE ‘GREEK EPIC VI 


Nov. 21, 1908. (The gable and pediment are northern; the flat roof and 
frieze Mycenaean.) 

Miss Lorimer of Somerville College, in an unpublished paper, has pointed 
out that the typical Mycenaean weapons (figure-eight shields, inlaid sword- 
blades, long rapiers) seem to have disappeared from the mainland of Greece 
before 1400 B.C. ; that is, some 250 years before the Siege of Troy. Homer 
does not mention these specific objects, but he uses freely the big ‘ Mycenaean’ 
shield, and he describes inlaid metal work in the Shield of Achilles (and 
Euripides in a sword-blade, £7. 476), elaborate palaces with bath-rooms 
(ἀσάμινθος, a pre-Greek word), as well as objects like Nestor’s cup, A 633 f., and 
the helmet with boar’s tusks in K 261-265, all of which are attested before 
1400 but not after. Miss Lorimer considers that this points to the existence 
in Homer of pre-Homeric and even pre-Trojan-War poetry, a conclusion not 
at all improbable. However, tradition A/zs relics will explain all but the 
shield, and the big shield did continue, as Herodotus tells us, at any rate in 
Asia, till about 650 B.c. Mr. Hall has published in /. H..S. xxxi. p. 123 a relief 
representing Sennacherib (705-680 B.C.) receiving a deputation of Carians or 
Ionians with crested helmets and big tower-shields. And on the mainland, 
in spite of the silence of the monuments, the language of Tyrtaeus (p. 149 n.) 
seems to imply the use of the big shield. See p. τοῦ ἢ. 

In the realm of language two general results seem to me to emerge with 
increasing clearness: (1) the mixture of old and new is proved to the hilt; 
(2) the task of separating the strata is shown to be much more difficult than 
the last generation of scholars imagined ; you cannot simply cut out ‘ late parts’ 
and leave the rest uniform (see above, Preface to the Second Edition, p. x). 

Fr. Bechtel, Dze Vocalcontraction bet Homer, supports the general results 
of criticism, especially those of Robert, and is usefully criticized by K. Meister, 
Die Homerische Kunstsprache, 1921. Particularly valuable are Wackernagel’s 
Sprachliche Untersuchungen zu Homer,1916. Dr. Hentze, in several articles 
(Beitr. zur Kunde der 1G. Sprache, xxix, p. 280 ff., Philologus, N. F., xix. 2, 
p. 161 ff., Zeitschr. f. vergleich. Sprachforschung, N. F., xli, p. 356 ff.), has 
treated the different stages in Homeric syntax, especially in conditional and 
final sentences. Signor Della Seta, in the Rendiconti della R. Accad. det 
Linced (Classe di sc. moralt, etc.), serie v, vol. xvi, pp. 134-210, shows interest- 
ing results about the comparative age of the words ’Axavol, ᾿Αργεῖοι, Δαναοί ; 
᾿Αθήνη, ᾿Αθηναίη, and” lov, Τροίη. The age comes out in the above order. The 
late and perhaps Attic form ᾿Αθηναίη occurs oftenest in the Converse of Hector 
and Andromache, Z (10 ᾿Αθηναίη, 4 ᾿Αθήνη), a significant suggestion. Prof. 
J. A. Scott of Illinois, in Classical Philology (Chicago), iv. 3, v. 1, and 
Classical Review, xxiv. 1, has ably argued that some of the commonly received 
differences of language between the //zad and the Odyssey, as wholes, are 
fallacious, but has carried his own methods, I fear, to still more fallacious 
conclusions in Zhe Unity of Homer, University of California, 1921. See 
G. M. Bolling in Class. Phil. xiv. 4 (1919) on Abstract Words in Homer, and 
2b. xvi. 4 (1921) on Infs. in-euev. Miss Stawell (Homer and the Iliad, Dent, 
1910, a finely written book) has attempted a new division of the poems into 
parts written by Homer and parts added later. (See Mr. Shewan in C. Q., April 
and October, 1910.) The problem ot the mixture of dialects in Homer receives 
much light from Thumb’s admirable Handbuch der griechischen Dialekte 
(Heidelberg, 1909). 

In the domain of metre, the enormous importance of which for Homeric 
Language was demonstrated in Schulze’s Quaestiones Epicae, an article by 
Mr. J. A. J. Drewitt on Scansion in Homeric Verse (C. Q., April, 1908) is 
remarkable, both for its fine observation and its curious results. Solmsen’s 
Untersuchungen zur Gr. Laut- und Verslehre (1901) have had much influence, 
but to me remain unconvincing; cf. Danielsson, Zur Lehre vom Hom. 
Digamma, Ind. Forsch. xxv. 264-284, and especially Witte in Pauly-Wissowa 
on Homeros, Sprache und Metrik. 


ΝΠ 
THE ILIAD AS A TRADITIONAL BOOK 


II. PECULIARITIES 


WHILE I was trying in my fourth lecture to draw a general 
comparison between the Hebrew traditional history and the 
Greek epic as regards their manner of growth, an objection may 
have occurred to some of my hearers. The objects compared 
are too unlike. The Book of Genesis or of Judges is essentially 
a chronicle, a prose record of traditional history, narrated as far 
as possible in order of time, year after year, generation after 
generation. The //ad is a definite poem, composed with great 
artistic elaboration for an artistic end, beginning in the middle 
of the action, and leading up to a skilfully prepared climax. Its 
methods are the methods not of conscientious pillar-to-post 
chronicle, but of artistic fiction. The time of its main action 
amounts to some four days.! 

This is true; and before going further we should try to realize 
how the difference has come about. Both books, I believe, are 
made from much the same raw material, but they have developed 
it in different ways. In the simplest form of the saga there were 
probably elements of both prose and poetry—poetry where you 
happened to find it, in lyrics or ballads, and prose to fill in the 
facts. We find that style of composition in the Book of Judges 
and some Icelandic sagas. But Hebrew poetry, as it developed 
afterwards, is too impatient and emotional to narrate history. 
In a book like Judges, on the contrary, poetry has been con- 
quered by prose. The saga has been developed, to the best of 
the writer’s power, into a systematic prose history, chronologi- 
cally arranged and edited with a view to religious instruction. 
In the Greek saga it looks as if poetry had things its own way. 
Greek poetry developed special forms for telling continuously 


1 More exactly, four days of fighting followed by twenty-two of funeral. 


170 THE RISE OF THE ‘GREEK EPIC vil 


the deeds of the past. And it told them as it pleased. The 
versified chronicle became more and more of a poem and less of 
a history. It meant no harm; but it had in it from the first a 
dangerous and unprincipled element, the poet’s sense of beauty, 
which in that particular soil grew, and overpowered in number- 
less elusive ways the honest spirit of chronicle. 

The early French epics were mostly known by the name of 
Chansons de Geste, that is, apparently, Songs of Gesfa or 
Deeds. This plural Gesta was often used in the title of historical 
books, like Gesta Francorum, which was interpreted to mean 
History of the Franks, as though ‘ Gesta’ as a feminine singular 
was equivalent to ‘History’. The Epics were Songs of History. 
The poet found his material sometimes in traditions and popular 
songs, sometimes in the direct prompting of monks who read 
or showed him their chronicles! Possibly some similar origin 
should be assumed for most of our Greek epic remains; but, 
here as elsewhere, the difficulty is that our record begins so late. 
We have none of the raw materials left; we have only finished 
poems or fragments of finished poems. We have no Aeolian 
epos; no Ionian; we have not even the text as recited at the 
Panathenaea when it first came from Ionia. We have only, so 
to speak, a text edited ‘from the prompt-books of the best 
theatres’ at some time later than the death of Aristotle. Still it 
may be instructive to spend a few minutes in trying to think out” 
something of the processes by which poems could be made out 
of saga. 

Suppose, for instance, that some early editor of the Book of 
Judges had been not a scribe or priest, but a Homeric bard or 
rhapsode, how might he have treated his material ??_ Our Book of 
Judges consists mainly of the exploits of four Judges or Heroes 
who delivered Israel from oppression: Ehud of Benjamin, who 
slew Eglon, King of Moab; Barak, of the northern tribe of 
Naphtali, who defeated Sisera, the general of Jabin, King of 
Hazor, and whose story contains the splendid song of Deborah ; 


See Les Légendes épigues, Recherches sur la formation des Chansons de 
Geste, par J. Bédier. Paris, 1908. Also La Naissance de la Chanson de 
Geste, by J. Flach, Journal des Savants, vii (1909).—Did the phrase ‘rerum 
ce scriptor’ = ‘ writer of chronicles’ help in the change of meaning of 
gestes’! 
* If I remember rightly, the old scholar Joshua Barnes did actually make 
a Latin epic out of the Book of Judges. 


VII JUDGES 7 As AY GREEK? EPIC ΤᾺ 


Gideon of Abiezer in Manasseh, who overthrew the Midianites ; 
and Jephthah of Gilead, who smote Ammon and sacrificed his 
daughter, There is added to these an account of Samson, who 
did not exactly deliver his people, and was rather a ‘strong 
man’ of folk-lore than a judge; and an appendix on the sins 
and destruction of the tribe of Benjamin. There are also brief 
mentions of seven other Judges who are little more than names. 
This raw material is worked up into an appearance of continuous 
history with fixed, though fictitious, dates and a special religious 
moral. 

Now what would a Homeric bard have done with it? He 
would, we may suppose, select a hero and a centre for his poem. 
The choice would lie between three heroes: Gideon, who has 
three chapters devoted to him, besides a long account of the 
doings of his son; Jephthah, who has two chapters and a fine 
tragic story; and Samson, who has four chapters. Now my 
instinct tells me that he would not choose Samson: and to 
choose Jephthah would lead at once to a human sacrifice in the 
front plane of the story. It follows that he would probably 
choose Gideon. Then he would consider how to draw into 
his poem as much as possible of the rest of the book. He 
certainly must not lose the Song of Deborah, for instance. 
Looking through the record, he would find that at a certain 
point (vi. 34 f.) ‘Gideon blew a trumpet and Abiezer was 
gathered together after him. And he sent messengers through- 
out all Manasseh . .. and unto Asher and unto Zebulun and unto 
Naphtali; and they came up to meet him.’ There is an opening. 
When the herald went to Naphtali, we should be told, he spoke 
to the men of Naphtali, and the men of Naphtali wavered, and 
did not wish to join the war. They feasted and bade their 
minstrel sing to them. And an old minstrel—in Greek saga he 
would be a blind minstrel—came and smote his harp and sang 
the Song of Deborah, how Jabin the Syrian had oppressed 
Israel; how Barak awoke and led his captivity captive; how 
Deborah arose, a mother in Israel ; how the river Kishon swept 
them away, the ancient river, the river Kishon. So the princes 
of Naphtali were reminded of the great deeds of their forefathers 
and came in their strength to fight for Gideon. All the Song of 
Deborah will come straight in. 


17% THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC VII 


The story of Ehud, again; it is easy to get that told by some Ben- 
jamite. Then the great story of Jephthah must not be omitted. 
It only needs a little boldness. When the embassy comes to the 
men of Gilead, we shall be told, their aged chieftain, Jephthah, is 
bowed with grief and cannot join Gideon himself, because he is 
not yet purified from the slaying of his daughter. He or another 
Gileadite tells the story, and he sends his followers with a 
blessing. The only real difficulty lies in the dates. Very un- 
fortunately, Jephthah seems to have been later than Gideon. If 
the chronology is firmly established, our bard will have to bring 
in a prophet who can foretell Jephthah’s story. But if the 
chronology is not beyond dispute, or if our poet feels that, be 
the facts as they may, the poem will be much the better for the 
change, he will ignore the dates and let the Muse have her way. 


And Samson? Well, one of two things must be done. 
Either we will leave Samson entirely aside, to be celebrated in 
separate lays of his own, or, if we must cover that piece of 
history too, we may have some character like Nestor in the 
Cyérva and Ziad, like Menelaus in the Odyssey, who can make 
a digression and tell the whole story. Gideon’s father, Joash, 
might do, or his armour-bearer, Purah. Joash can regret that 
men are not now as they once were, when he was young and 
was entertained at Zorah by Samson: Samson, son of Manoah, 
who... Orhecan warn some young man to be prudent, lest 
he should fall like Samson, who... 

And for the rest of the Judges, I believe that a Greek bard, 
such as the authors of the Cyfrza, would have got them all in. 
The wise Joash would denounce the weakness of the present 
race of men, how unlike to Shamgar, the son of Anath, who 
smote with an ox-goad six hundred Philistines! Or Gideon, in 
a great speech refusing to bow down to Baal, would explain that 
nothing would induce him to do so, not all the riches of Jair the 
Gileadite, who gave to his thirty sons thirty cities and set them 
to ride upon thirty asses: not all the still vaster wealth of Abdon 
the son of Hillel. And so on. 


As a characteristic of the Hellenic races, in contrast with the 
Hebrew, there is great significance in this tendency to work up 
tradition into an artistic and poetical form. And it does add one 


VII FICTION AND TRADITION 173 


more to the already numerous forces which turn all legendary 
history away from the path of truth.’ If you take up the /éad 
as a record of history, you will soon put it down asso much mere 
poetry. But if you read it as fiction you will at every page be 
pulled up by the feeling that it is not free fiction. The poet does 
not invent whatever he likes. He believes himself to be dealing 
with real events and real people, to be recording and explaining 
things that have value, primarily, because they are supposed to 
be true. And again, when you come to the passages that do not 
represent real tradition but merely serve to join or to introduce 
parts that originally did not belong together, you will inevitably 
be struck by the extreme reluctance of the Homeric poets to 
trust long to their own invention. It is one of the things that 
sometimes irritates an ordinary modern reader in the analysis of 
the Ziad or Odyssey to be forced to observe how the later 
poets or editors, those responsible for ἃ or ©, for example, will 
go to any lengths in patching up centos of old lines, taken from 
the most varying places, rather than invent new lines. Perhaps 
their command of the epic style was not confidently perfect. 
But after all it was not the business of a bard to invent. It was 
his business to know, by information from the Muses or else- 
where, the history of the past, and to tell it to his new audience 
accurately, word for word, as the Muses had told it to him. 
Even in the case of new songs, which naturally had their attrac- 
tion, the poet’s praise is that he knows them and tells them 
accurately. ‘Accurately?’ Well, σαφῶς ἕκαστα; each detail 
vividly and clearly, so that you feel it must come straight from 
the Muses. The imagination which he puts into it is merely one 
of his best means of persuading people that it is true. 

I suspect that the element of conscious fiction comes in first of 
all in the formulae of transition and introduction. The writer of 
Z, for instance, makes Glaucus tell to Diomédés during a battle 
the whole story of Bellerophon. That is merely his way of 
getting the history of Bellerophon told. He does mean that the 
story is true; but he does not in the least mean to assert that 
Glaucus actually told it on such an occasion.?_ It would probably 


1 Cf. note on p. 193 below. 

2 We happen to know that some ancient critics transferred the whole 
incident to another place; presumably they were following their MSS. 
Schol. Z 119. 


174 THE RSE OF ‘THE GREEK EPIC VII 


be a very complicated business to unravel in the Zéad what the 
reader is meant to take as history, and what is merely the device 
of the poet for convenience in narrative or for dramatic effect. 
And I fancy that the instinct of most readers will generally lead 
them right without any rules. The important thing is that there 
are real masses of supposed historical truth, somehow connected 
together, and beautified, as they pass, by the processes of fiction. 
The main basis is not fiction, but traditional history. A clear 
proof of this lies, I think, in the general agreement as to state- 
ments of important fact between all our different sources of 
tradition ; the wide range of epic or quasi-epic poems ascribed to 
Homer, Hesiod, Stesichorus, and others, and even, where we can 
get them, the local legends attached to temples and oracles. 
The differences between these various sources are of course 
large and numerous; but the underlying consensus of statement 
quite unmistakable. And its significance can only be minimized 
by adopting a theory which was universally prevalent a few 
decades ago, but which in our present knowledge can only be 
described as desperately improbable. According to this theory, 
there is really in Greece no traditional history at all: the Ziad 
and Odyssey are two primaeval works of fiction, preserved as it 
were by miracle from pre-historic times; and all the other epic 
tradition is made up out of these two books by the deductions, 
imitations, and inventions of ingenious commentators. 

In some cases this process has no doubt occurred. In others 
it may have occurred. For instance, there existed in the sixth 
century a tradition of a marriage between Telemachus and the 
youngest daughter of Nestor, Polycasté. Now, in the Odyssey, 
when Telemachus goes to Nestor’s house, Polycasté is put in 
charge of him and, after the custom of the age, gives him a bath. 
Did the poet of the Odyssey know the tradition? Did he 
perhaps know people who claimed descent from Telemachus 
and Polycasté? Or, on the other hand, did the poet of the 
Odyssey mean nothing at all when he mentioned this one 
daughter by name and put Telemachus in her charge, and is 
the supposed tradition a mere embroidery worked up from that 
accidental mention? In that case I hesitate to decide. But in 
the great mass of cases one cannot hesitate. The existence of a 
real saga behind any particular treatment of it forces itself upon 


vil THE BELLEROPHON STORY 175 


the mind ot the reader. As a matter of fact, the Ziad and 
Odyssey not only refer to other legends as already existing and 
treated by other poets; that every one admits ;! but they often 
in their digressions tell stories in a form which clearly suggests 
recapitulation or allusion. They imply the existence elsewhere 
of a completer poetical treatment of the same subject. Take, for 
instance, the story of Bellerophon in Ziad Z. The queen, 
Anteia, her love being rejected, falsely accuses Bellerophon to 
her husband. (Z 165.) 


So she spoke, and fury seized the king for the thing he 
heard, Slay him he would not: he had aidos of that in his 
heart. But he would send him to Lycia, and gave to him 
grisly signs, which he wrote inside a folded tablet, many 
and murderous, and bade him show them to his wife’s 
father, that he might perish. And he went to Lycia under 
the blameless guiding of the gods. And when he came to 
Lycia and the flowing Xanthus the king of broad Lycia 
honoured him with open heart: for nine days he feasted 
him, and nine oxen he slew. But when the tenth rosy- 
fingered dawn appeared, then he questioned him and asked 
to see the sign that he brought with him from Proitos his 
son-in-law. ‘Then, when he had received the evil sign, first 
he bade Bellerophon slay the raging Chimaera (She-goat). 
Now she was of birth divine, and not of men: in front a lion, 
behind a serpent, and in the midst a She-goat, breathing out 
a fearful force of burning fire. And her he slew, following 
the stgns of the gods. 


So on and so on. Bellerophon surmounts all his trials; the 
king of Lycia repents and gives him his daughter in marriage. 
He seems to be on the point of living happily ever after. 


But when he also was hated of all the gods, then verily 
along the Plain of Wandering alone he wandered, eating his 
own heart, avoiding the footfall of man. 


What does it all mean? Is that the way to tell a new story 
unknown to your hearers? One wants more explanation all 
through. What ‘blameless guiding of the gods’ led Bellerophon 
to Lycia? What ‘signs of the gods’ showed him how to slay 
the Chimaera?? Above all, how did he become‘ hated of all the 


1 Monro, Odyssey, Appendix, p. 294. 
? Pegasus is omitted by Homer as a monster: he occurs Hes. 7heog. 325 


176 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC VII 


gods’, and go wandering? And why the phrase ‘ when he a/so’? 
Is it not plain that the poet of Z is in the first place referring to 
an existing legend, and secondly, one may almost say, quoting 
from an existing poem? And what can that poem have been? 
Bellerophon was a Corinthian hero. So that when we find that 
there did exist an ancient mass of poetry vaguely called ‘ Corin- 
thiaca’, and attributed to one Eumélus of Corinth, which is on 
general grounds the obvious source for any Corinthian traditions, 
we naturally conjecture that some early form of the ‘ Corinthiaca_’ 
is probably the source of our particular digression. 

Let us follow this conjecture further. Shortly before this 
Bellerophon passage there comes in the //ad (Z 130 ff.) another 
digression, telling how Lycurgus, King of Thrace, came to an 
evil end because he ‘ fought with the gods’ in resisting Dionysus, 
and the gods hated him. The passage troubles commentators 
because Homer usually ignores Dionysus. As Dr. Leaf says, 
‘ Dionysus is an absolute stranger to the Homeric pantheon.’ If 
we look into the scholia we find that the story of Lycurgus 
resisting the god Dionysus was told by Eumélus of Corinth in 
the ‘Europia’. The Europia, or ‘ Verses about Europa’, are 
presumably the parts of the Corzzthzaca or general Corinthian 
traditions which dealt with Europa. The same source which we 
suspected for Bellerophon! Evidently Homer—if we may so 
name the poet of Z—since he was using the Europia for the 
story of Bellerophon, took the Dionysus-Lycurgus story from 
them at the same time. And he speaks, you remember, of 
Bellerophon aéso being hated of all the gods. That a/so has no 
meaning where it stands in the 7Zad. Apparently in the original 
Bellerophon came in a list of such people, following upon 
Lycurgus. Lycurgus was hated of the gods and went blind: 
‘Bellerophon also’ was hated of the gods, and went mad, It is 
all clear. If anything were needed to make it clearer still, it 
would be that the Verses of Eumélus are quoted as the earliest 
known authority for the story of the Argo and Medea’, and the 
τὴν μὲν Πήγασος εἷλε καὶ ἐσθλὸς Βελλεροφόντης, and is mythologically very 
ancient. (The Chimaera, a savage monster in remote lands, is obviously 
less incredible than the tame Pegasus in a stable in Corinth.) 

1 e.g. by Schol. Pind. O/. xiii. 74; Schol. Ap. Rhod. iii. 1372 (six lines 


directly borrowed from Eumelus); Paus. ii. 3. 10. That is, the most authori- 
tative form of the Medea-Argo epic, in Alexandrian times and later, was the 


VII CROSS QUOTATIONS: EXPLANATION 177 


composer of our Odyssey speaks of the Argo as a subject of 
which ‘all minds are full’. 

There has been an extraordinary reluctance among scholars 
to look facts like these in the face, or even to understand the 
possibility of their occurring. This comes from two causes. 
First, criticism is still beset by the unfortunate phrase ‘Cyclic 
poets’, and all the false ideas it connotes. When the //ad and 
Odyssey had become canonical some scholar unknown made a 
complete ‘cycle’ ot epic history based primarily upon these two 
poems and, where they failed, on the remains of the various old 
traditional epics.!_ To call the poets themselves ‘ Cyclic’ because 
others made up a ‘cycle’ out of their remains is as unfair as to 
call an insect ‘microscopic’ because persons over whom it has no 
control choose to look at it through a microscope. It suggests, 
what is quite contrary to the evidence, that it was the original 
poets themselves who made this ‘ cycle’, deliberately completing 
the Ziad and Odyssey. And secondly, Greek scholarship is not 
yet familiar, as Hebrew is, with the idea of a traditional book. 
The truth, as we have already seen, is that all these poems or 
masses of tradition in verse form were growing up side by side 
for centuries. Either could quote or be quoted by the other as 
easily as the Book of Judges could refer to Samuel or Samuel to 
Judges. Both these books, if we are to believe the most careful 
Biblical scholars, had begun to exist by goo B.c.; but Judges 
was only finished a little before 200 B.C., and Samuel not quite 
finished then. Or, to take a much stronger concrete instance, to 
show how complicated this process of mutual quotation may be. 


Corinthian epic of ‘Eumelus’. It is the habit of the Grammatici to quote 
the earliest authority they can find. ‘Eumelus’ is, so to speak, the ‘ Homer’ 
of the Corinthian-argonautic traditions. So far as we can guess at the date 
of any personal ‘ Eumelus’ he would seem to be a Homer according to Nitzsch, 
not a Homer according to Hermann—i.e. not the original inventor but the 
late perfector of a floating epic tradition. The Corinthiaca had a most 
interesting history and well deserve a new monograph. One can trace in them 
(1) old mythical material ; (2) the fables generated by the earliest exploring 
voyages to the NE.; (3) a gathering-up and development of these legends in 
Corinth as a centre; (4) late re-editing and abridgement, such as occurred to 
the poems that were made into an ‘epic cycle’. Clement of Alexandria 
(Strom. vi. 267, Sylb.) thinks of Eumelus as the man who made the prose 
epitome then extant of certain epic traditions. See Appendix H. 

1 Περατοῦται ὁ ἐπικὸς κύκλος, ἐκ διαφόρων ποιητῶν συμπληρούμενος 
μέχρί τῆς ἀποβάσεως ᾽Οδυσσέως τῆς εἰς ᾿Ιθάκην, ἐν ἧ καὶ ὑπὸ τοῦ παιδὸς Τηλεμάχου 
ἀγνοοῦντος κτείνεται, Proclus afud Phot. Bibl. 319 A. See Appendix H, ‘The 
Epic Cycle.’ 

2760 N 


178 THE’ RISE OF ‘THE GREEK? EPIC VII 


Isaiah, chap. xxxvi-xxxix, is quite full of quotations, sometimes 
complete, sometimes abridged, from the Second Book of Kings. 
(Driver, Z. O. 7., p. 227.) On the other hand, the Second Book 
of Kings quotes not merely Isaiah but the much later writer, 
Jeremiah ; and quotes him not directly but by way of Deutero- 
nomy. That is, it takes from Deuteronomy passages which 
Deuteronomy has already taken from Jeremiah. (Ib. p. 203.) 
All the great books were growing up together, and passages 
could be repeated from any one to any other. 

These facts should guard us against two possible misconcep- 
tions. They show that the //ad, though in one sense it may 
be called an independent work of fiction, is also a Traditional 
Book, dependent on a living saga or tradition. It was meant to 
be history, or what then stood for history. And secondly, that 
it is not alone among such books, a great original copied by 
a few late and obscure imitators, but one among a great number, 
each embodying the traditions specially prominent in their own 
circles of influence, and all of them freely overlapping and 
intercommunicating as the enterprise of a bard or the interest 
of his audience suggested. 

I have jotted in the margin of my //zad notes of the probable 
sources of the various bits of legend which seem foreign to the 
main story of the Z/ad or alien to their immediate context. 
Many of them have been in ancient times or modern marked 
as ‘spurious’ or as ‘interpolated’—a phrase which seems 
often merely to mean that the critic wishes a line were not 
there when it plainly is. One finds in the first few books of 
the Ziad: first, the Catalogue of Ships, belonging originally to 
some Boeotian source, the school of genealogies and catalogues. 
This was known even in antiquity. The ancient title of the 
whole passage was ‘ Boeotia’, and it is omitted in many MSS." 
But we can see that there was an intermediate source before 
the Catalogue came into the 7Zad. Various points of language 
show that the heroes are described, not as they were in the 
tenth year of the war, nor even as already disembarked at 
Troy, but as in the act of assembling at Aulis. For example 


1 In D, 7, U, and pap. B, among the best ones (Leaf). Mr. Allen, in his 
great collation, cites an even longer list. The similes introducing the Cata- 
logue, however, are not omitted. 


VII SOURCES OF (THE: “ILIAD” 179 


695-710, 716-717. We have in 716 ff. a description of the men 
of Methone, ‘ whose leader was Philoctetes the skilful bowman, 
and in each ship were fifty rowers skilled to fight with the bow.’ 
So far all is according to the usual formula, and all is correct— 
as a description of the fleet assembling at Aulis. But by the 
time of the beginning of the 7/ad Philoctetes had long been 
marooned on Lemnos; so, without any alteration in the original 
version, eight lines are mechanically added to explain that 
Philoctetes was not there. Similarly in 695-710 Protesilaus is 
described as leader of the contingent from Phylaké, and then 
a correction is added to explain that he was now dead. Most 
conclusive of all, the tenses of the verbs are imperfect: ‘He 
proceeded to draw up his ships’ or ‘his ships moved into line.’ 
(ἄγε νῆας, νέες ἐστιχόωντο) Now we happen, by the luck of 
a quotation, to know that there was an old poem, the Cyprian 
Verses, which narrated at length the assembling of the Greeks 
at Aulis and also contained a Catalogue. True, our authority 
only speaks of a ‘Catalogue of the Trojans’, such as forms the 
second part of our Catalogue in B. But to any one who has 
grasped at all what literature was in the days before the book 
trade and the reading public it will seem a strained hypothesis 
to suggest that a Greek bard, reciting to Greeks, would give a 
catalogue of the enemy and leave out his own people.! We 


* See Wilamowitz, Hom. Unt., p. 374. On the later Catalogues (Apollo- 
dorus’ Zfitome; Hyginus; Dictys Cretensis, Dares Phrygius) see Allen, 
Catalogue, pp. 22-31. In general they put the scene at Aulis ; their numbers 
are variable, but often less grandiose than those in B; Hyginus, in the 
manner of his time, tries to give more details, while Dictys and Dares 
add some names. They are all dependent on B, or at least on the same 
source as B and Euripides. See also Appendix J. The curious Cata- 
logue inserted in Eur. 7922. Aul. 164-302 is, of course, abbreviated from 
some older source, and that source seems to be the Cyfrza rather than 
B. First, the ships are there described at Aulis; Protesilaus is alive and so 
is Palamedes (195-9) ; there is a reference to the Judgement of Paris (181); 
all these points would come straight from the Cygrv/a, they would imply con- 
scious change if the source was B. Also, it is very interesting that the 
problem how to harmonize the positions of Adrastus and Agamemnon—one 
being, as Milder puts it (p. 60 ff.), the great king of Argos in the 7/edazs, the 
other in the //ad or Achzlleis—is solved in a different way from that followed 
by B. In B Agamemnon leads his forces from Mycenae and ‘ Sikyon where 
Sormerly Adrastus was king’ (Β 570) ; in /ph. Aud. 269 Agamemnon leads the 
ships of Mycenae, ‘and with him was Adrastus, as a friend with a friend,’ 
(The emendation ἀδελῴός is a wilful refusal of light.) The question we 
cannot answer is how far the MSS. of the Catalogue may have varied in 
Euripides’ day, but, as they both stand, it seems that the Catalogue in the 
4121. Aui, is in many points nearer to the source than that in B. 


N 2 


180 ΤῊΝ RISE OF -THE GREEK: EPIC VII 


may fairly suppose that our Catalogue, wherever its origin, 
stood at one time in the Cyfrza. 

In any case the Catalogue provides us with an instructive 
example of method.1 Whatever the source from which the 
Catalogue comes, the poet of the //ad, in taking it over, has 
taken over not only the facts but the actual words, even when 
they did not quite suit their new context. The imperfect tenses, 
for example, are certainly not natural as they stand. They are 
left standing because the bard did not think it worth while— 
or perhaps did not think it right—to re-write the lines. It is 
exactly like that ‘ a/so’ in the Bellerophon passage. 

It is of course hard to get clear instances of this process of 
verbal borrowing because the poems which served as sources 
are not extant. But sometimes we get a glimpse of one. For 
instance, in the fifth book (E 385 ff.) there is a list of the 
injuries done to gods by men, especially by Heracles, which 
seems to be taken from the Herac/eza (cf. especially 403 f., with 
Leaf’s note). We happen to have a quotation from the Heracleza, 
as composed and re-formed in the sixth century by Panyassis, 
the uncle of Herodotus, and the quotation has a startling verbal 
and rhythmical similarity with this passage in E. If the passage 
in E could be original there, then Panyassis might have been 
merely imitating E; but the passage evidently is not original 
in E. Presumably Panyassis and the author of E are both 
adapting the same passage in an older form of the Heracleta.* 

Another interesting reference to the Heracleza is in The 
Tricking of Zeus (ΒΞ 249-69), where Sleep mentions how Hera 
once before, in the matter of Heracles, bribed him to put his 


1 Two remarkable books have appeared on the Catalogue since my second 
edition: Leaf’s Homer and History (Macmillan, 1915) and T. W. Allen’s 
Flomeric Catalogue of Ships (Oxford, 1921). Both regard the Catalogue as 
coming from an alien source, but beyond that they differ. See below, p. 202. 

3 The lines are, in the //iad, 385, 392, 395: 

τλῆ μὲν "Apns, ὅτε μιν Ὦτος κρατερός τ᾽ ᾿Εφιάλτης. .. 
tAn δ᾽ Ἥρη, ὅτε μιν κρατερὸς πάϊς ’Audirpvovos .. . 
τλῆ δ᾽ ᾿Αἴδης ἐν τοῖσι πελώριος ὠκὺν ὀϊστόν, 
εὖτέ μιν ωὐτὸς ἀνὴρ κτλ. 
In Panyassis, fr. 16: 
τλῆ μὲν Δημήτηρ, τλῆ δὲ κλυτὸς ἀμφιγυήεις, 
τλῆ δὲ Ποσειδάων, τλῆ δ᾽ ἀργυρότοξος ᾿Απόλλων, 
ἀνδρὶ παρὰ θνητῷ θητευέμεν εἰς ἐνιαυτόν. 
τλῆ δὲ καὶ ὀβριμόθυμος "Ἄρης ὑπὸ πατρὸς ἀνάγκῃ. 


vil SOURCES) ΟΕ ΤῊΝ «ΠΑ 181 


spell upon Zeus and how he suffered for it; another, very clear, 
in T 95-136 tells how, by a plot of Hera’s, Heracles was born 
a servant to Eurystheus. There seem to be other fragments 
of Heracéeza in some of the stories about Pylos. Other passages, 
again, seemed to be derived from those poems or groups of 
saga stuff which were eventually handed down under the names 
of the Cyfrza, the Little Itad, the Sack of Ihon, the Aethiopis, 
the Argonautica, the Battle of Gods and Titans, and the 
Naupactia or Aetolian verses.! 

But the whole problem of Homer’s sources has been brought 
brilliantly into the foreground of interest since the first appear- 
ance of this book by Dietrich Milder’s Dze /ias und thre 
Quellen (1909). Milder conceives the main idea of the “ας 
to be a great united war of all the Greeks against an arrogant 
barbarian city, and that the poet builds up this idea partly by 
pure invention, partly by free use of existing poems. The 
Meleager story, the Zedazs, and a judicious fictional use of 
Nestor account for the greater part of the 7“ad. The Meleager 
poem quoted at length in the Embassy to Achilles (I 527-599) 
contains a μῆνις with all the motives of the Achilles μῆνις as 
told in the /Zad. It is, of course, earlier than the book which 
quotes it. It also seems more original and better grounded. 
When Meleager abstained from battle because of his mother's 
curse, he stayed perforce in his θάλαμος in the besieged city, 
whereas Achilles might easily have gone away from Troy. 
And several peculiarities of the Embassy Story in I would be 
natural enough in an embassy to Meleager. This poem, then, 
provides the motive of the ‘wrath’, which is for fictional 
purposes highly convenient. The poet can have his chief hero 
either present or absent from the war, and thus make room 
for the deeds of all the other heroes of legend whom he wished 
to draw into his great story. Then comes the Zhebazs. There 
was, according to Milder, no detailed record of any siege of 
Troy, only a tradition of the Acolic colonization and the actual 
remains of more than one burnt city. But there did exist one 
great epic describing the expedition against Thebes of a federa- 
tion led by Adrastus, King of Argos. This provided a mass 
of fighting by mixed Greek champions in a plain against a city 

' See Leaf on E 392. Also below, pp. 219 ff. 


182 THE RISE OF ‘THE GREEK’ EPIC VII 


on a hill, an ancient motive of art which we find already ex- 
tant in Middle Minoan frescoes and in a silver vase from 
Mycenae.! This explains why Homer’s Greeks are called 
Ἀργεῖοι and Δαναοί equally with Ayaof, which is the proper 
name for Achilles’ men. It also explains the presence of Greek 
chariots in the 7Zad. The charioteers of the 7edazs are famous ; 
witness Adrastus, Amphiaraus, and Tydeus; while it is not 
likely that an early Greek army would have been capable of 
transporting horses and chariots in an expedition overseas to 
Troy. The actual heroes of the 7ebazs are not brought over 
to Troy. That would have been counter to tradition. But 
Diomedes, the son of Tydeus, is there, and brings with him 
a tremendous ἀριστεία embodying the only real chariot charges 
in the /ad, and perhaps taken straight from his father. The 
place of Adrastus is taken by Agamemnon. He is the leader ot 
all Greece, and we are told that he has succeeded Adrastus as 
King of Argos, though in most aspects he and his brother 
king look remarkably like two normal kings of Sparta, and 
it is in Sparta, or the neighbourhood, that, outside Homer, 
they have their graves and their worship and most of their 
roots. It somewhat confirms these arguments when we find 
that Hector, the defender of Troy, has quite independently been 
shown by Diimmler and Bethe to have intimate Theban con- 
nexions and to have been worshipped in Thebes as a local hero. 
This bold theory needs more careful consideration than it has 
received. Probably Milder errs in underrating the amount of 
genuine saga material about Troy which is embodied in the 
Liad; but I think he has shown that there is in it much more 
conscious fiction than the present writer, at any rate, was 
formerly inclined to believe; and, further, that the Z7ebazs is 
probably one of the poet’s most important sources. 

On the other hand there are books, and very fine books, 
which seem to be pure original fiction. The most brilliant of 
all are perhaps Z and M. Then there is I, embodying, besides 
the Meleager story, the realistic and perhaps genuine history 
of Phoinix. There is also K, describing a midnight raid by 
Odysseus and Diomédés, in which they catch a Trojan spy with 


1 Evans, Palace ΤΣ I, pp. 302, 314. 
2 See below, pp. 210 ἢ 


VII SOURCES OF (THE ‘ILIAD’ 183 


a fictitious name—Dolon, Crafty—and through him succeed 
in killing Rhésus, chief of the Thracians. This looks like a 
piece of fiction made up out of two separate traditional sources: 
a tradition of the slaying of Rhésus by Diomédés, presumably 
in Thrace,! and another about the midnight expedition of 
Odysseus and Diomédés into Troy to carry off the Palladium.’ 
Of course that is only conjecture. But it serves to illustrate 
the kind of material with which we are dealing in the Ziad. 


In its actual working up, however, our //ad has reached a 
further stage of development than the ordinary run of poetic 
chronicles, if I may use the term. The imaginary epicizing of 
the Book of Judges which we discussed some time ago would 
land us, not in a poem like the //ad, but in one like the Cygrza 
or the Corzuzthiaca, in one of those authorless chronicle-poems 
of which we hear so much in Greek literature, and know, at 
first hand, so little. It was their fate, first, to be superseded by 
the ZZad and Odyssey, and then, in a later age, to be strung 
together in what was called an ‘Epic Cycle’ by some scholar 
or historian. Here again the Odyssey shows itself a stage 
nearer to the raw material. And, curiously enough, there is 
one quite late poet who, partly by conscious love of the archaic 
and partly from the peculiar nature of his genius, has returned 
to a type of epic chronicle earlier than either the 7Zad or the 
Odyssey. Imean the Alexandrian poet of the Argonaut legend, 
Apollonius Rhodius. 

Let us consider this point more closely. What is the meaning 
of the name “ας, in Greek ἡ ᾿Ιλιὰς ménois? Stas is an ad- 
jective meaning ‘about Ilion’. /oészs means ‘verse-writing’: 
that is, first, it denotes the process of ‘making’ verses, and 
secondly, the result of the process, a mass of verse-writing. 
Not, you will observe, a thing quite so definite as a Poéma. 
It is ‘poetry’, not a ‘poem’, The name ᾿Ιλιὰς πόησις, then, 
means ‘the poetry about Troy’. That is the traditional name, 


1 See below, Lecture VIII, pp. 215 ff. 

* Καὶ of course occupies a peculiar position. The Townley Scholia have a 
very ancient note: ‘ They say that this rhapsody was “drawn up by itself” 
(ἰδίᾳ τετάχθαι) by Homer, and is not part of the //cad, but was put into the 
poem by Pisistratus.’ The language of K is also in many ways divergent 
from that of the rest of the //zad. See Leaf’s Introductory note to K, and 
Monro, H. G., p. 234. (See, however, Shewan’s Lay of Dolon, which tries to 
rebut this observation.) It is a brilliantly written book. 


184 THE RISE. OF THE. GREEK EPIC VII 


and it is generally felt to be pretty satisfactory. But how does 
the //ad itself begin? Does it begin, for instance, 


I sing of Ilion and Dardania of the swift horses, for 
whose sake the Danaans, servants of Ares, suffered many 
things ?} 

That would be the natural sort of beginning for an Jas Poészs. 
And the lines did, as a matter of fact, form the beginning of 
one of the old chronicle epics: the poem which afterwards 
supported a mutilated and obscure existence under the name 
of the Little Lhad. 

Our liad begins with quite a different appeal :— 

Sing of the Wrath, O Goddess, of Péleus’ son, the wrath 
accursed which laid many pains upon the Achaeans. 

That is, it professes to tell the story of a fatal quarrel between 
Achilles and Agamemnon, which took place in the tenth year 
of the war and lasted for a very few days. Nay, it does not 
tell even the whole of the Wrath quite exhaustively. It might 
have included the capture of the two causes of it, the maidens 
of Bresa and of Chryse. The poet appeals to the Muse to ‘sing 
of the Wrath, degznuing there where first there was strife and 
sundering between Agamemnon, King of men, and divine 
Achilles’. 

Now, we can understand this language. It implies the 
existence of a plentiful and well-known poetical tradition. It 
is the phrase of a bard selecting for purposes of recitation some 
special episode out of a longer history. It is the same in the 
opening of the Odyssey: ‘ From somewhere amid those tales, 
O Muse, speak to us also.’ It is the same with the bards who 
are spoken of in the Odyssey. 

And Demodocus called upon the god and made min- 
strelsy, beginning where the Greeks had gone upon thetr 


benched ships, and were sailing the sea, but Odysseus 
and his comrades lay hidden in the market of the Trojans 


(6 500). 
That is how the Phaeacian bard is described; and his lay seems 
to have lasted for a few hundred lines at most. That is as much 


1 Ps. Hdt. Vita Homeri, ὃ 16: 
Ἴλιον ἀείδω καὶ Δαρδανίην ἐύὔπωλον 
ns πέρι πολλὰ πάθον Δαναοί, θεράποντες ἤΑρηος. 


ὙΠ ‘ILIAD’ AND ‘MENIS’ 185 


as people will usually endure to listen to. The poet proposes 
to select out of a mass of legend the particular episode of the 
Wrath, an episode just large enough to make a good ‘ Lay’. 

The incidents of the Wrath are these: Agamemnon, provoked 
by the free-speaking of Achilles, puts a dishonour upon him. 
Achilles withdraws from the war. Agamemnon fights without 
him and is defeated by the Trojans. The Greek ships are in 
danger. Achilles is implored to save them. ‘He still will not 
fight himself, but sends his bosom friend, Patroclus. Patroclus 
is killed by Hector. Achilles, furious with remorse, joins in 
the battle himself, slays Hector, and gives Patroclus a splendid 
funeral. The subject, as here announced, is not Ilion as a whole, 
not even the last war of Ilion; it is merely a four-days’ incident 
in the tenth year of the war. And yet the poem is called ’I\ras 
πόησις, the ‘ poetry about Ilion’. 

And not unsuitably. For no sooner has the poet explained 
in the first book the origin of the Wrath than he leaves that 
subject and, roughly speaking, does not return to it until the 
eleventh book. He goes back in the second to a catalogue of 
all the Greek host, describing the fleet, not as it was in Troy 
after nine years of fighting, but as it was in Aulis before it 
started for Troy. After the catalogue come various battles, 
including a duel or ordeal by combat between the two principals 
in the international quarrel, Paris and Menelaus: battles which 
are rather curious as they now stand, but fall into place at once 
if you realize that they properly belong to the very beginning 
of the war. The ordeal by battle was tried first: owing to 
some Trojan’s treachery it failed, and the two nations sat down 
to a ten years’ conflict. Then follow further battles; in 4 an 
obscure duel between two other heroes:1 in E a whole brilliant 
poem about Diomédés,? which not only runs the risk of upsetting 
the balance of the //ad by dwarfing the exploits of Achilles, 
but also shows in itself a definite connexion with another context. 
Next, a fine stretch of poetry in Z, which tells of Troy from the 
inside and treats Hector as a sympathetic hero, not a hated 
enemy. Every line of it is noble: but how is it introduced? 


1 Very possibly pointing, as Bethe suggests, to a form of the legend in 
which Aias was the chief hero. There seem to be traces of such a form. 
2. See note on p. 179. Cf. Miilder, Que//en der Ilias, τοῖο. 


186 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC vil 


How is Hector brought into Troy? In the thick of a desperate 
battle, when Diomédés is slaughtering the Trojans and Hector 
is the only man at all capable of resisting him, Hector leaves the 
field to take a message, not in the least of a confidential nature, 
to his mother, and to converse with his wife! 

I am touching on all these points very lightly. The proof 
of each one depends for its validity on detailed and accurate 
examination of the words of the poem. Iam using them merely 
to indicate the sort of process by which the short Lay of the 
Wrath of Achilles has been made into the great ‘ Poetry about 
Troy’: or, to put the case from a different point of view, how 
the most diverse traditions of heroic fighting have been joined 
together and made fairly consistent by this ingenious device 
of the ‘Wrath’, I cannot think that the Wrath was mere fiction. 
It was an old traditional motive. But it was chosen, I suspect, 
for its fictional convenience. One chieftain after another can be 
the greatest of the Greeks while Achilles is away from the field.! 
If another is expressly asserted to be the best, or swiftest, or 
handsomest, of all warriors, even that statement can be retained 
by the addition of an inorganic line, like 

τῶν ἄλλων Δαναῶν μετ᾽ ἀμύμονα Πηλεΐωνα, 
or 

ὄφρ᾽ Axireds μήνιεν" ὁ γὰρ πολὺ φέρτατος ἦεν: 
‘of all the Greeks, else, after the blameless son of Peleus’, or 
‘while Achilles was in wrath. For he was the strongest far’. 
The composer, as a matter of fact, has reached out on every 
side and collected the most diverse masses of heroic tradition 
to insert between the joints of his Wrath-Lay. 

The result of this process is that the /éad is really a Lay 
which has utterly outgrown its natural boundaries. It professes 
to be a Lay, but is so no longer. There are other instances 
of this kind of growth in Greek literature. The Homeric Hymns 
give themselves out to be Προοίμια, ‘Preludes’; that is, mere 
addresses to a god, preparatory to beginning a real poem: the 

1 See Miilder, Homer und die altionische Elegie, pp.19 ff. Also Wecklein, 
Studien zur Ilias. Cf. N 321 ff., Β 673 f., 768 f., H 111 ff., 226 ff., contrasted 
with B 530, I 227, 229; Z 98 ff.; H 289. These last are perhaps the only 
passages where a superlative is applied to another hero without the addition 


of some qualifying clause about Achilles. Miilder’s arguments are attacked 
by Rothe (Zias als Dichtung, pp. 31-8), but not, I think, successfully. 


VII PURPOSE OF THE ‘ILIAD’ 187 


sort of prelude that Demodocus used when he ‘began from 
a god’. But these preludes have grown in interest and beauty 
and length, till now the first five of them run to some hundreds 
of lines apiece. They have become, not Preludes to a Lay, 
but complete Lays in themselves. Again, the victory songs 
performed by Pindar’s choruses generally contain less than 
fifty lines; but one of them has over four hundred lines, burst- 
ing all its natural bounds. That particular lyric, the Fourth 
Pythian, was composed to be a great gift and peace-offering 
laid at the feet of the King of Cyrene by an exiled noble. It 
was to be a gift such as no other noble had ever given, no king 
ever received. 


But now comes a difficulty. Every work of art that was 
ever created was intended in some way to be used. No picture 
was painted for blind men ; no ship built where there was no water. 
What was to be the use of the 7Zad? What audience would 
listen to the recitation of such a poem? It contains over fifteen 
thousand verses. It would occupy twenty to twenty-four hours 
of steady declamation. No audience could endure it, no bard 
could perform it, in one stretch. And it is specially constructed 
so as not to fall apart in lengths. From Lachmann onward 
innumerable scholars have tried to break it up into separate 
recitations, and have all failed. It is all one—at least, as far 
as its composers could make it so. A single lay could be recited 
at one sitting. A chronicle poem, falling easily apart into 
separate stories, could be recited evening after evening in several 
sittings. The Cygrza, from what we know of them, would fall 
apart excellently into separate episodes ; so would a good deal 
of the Odyssey. It has the ‘plots of many tragedies in it’, as 
Aristotle has observed, and as we have noticed before. But 
the //ad has been deliberately elaborated on a plan which puts 
it out of use for ordinary purposes of recitation. Yet recited 
it must certainly have been.! 

The late F. A. Paley was so much impressed by this difficulty 
that he actually came to the conclusion that the 7/ad was a 
poem composed for reading, not for recitation, and that con- 


1 Cf, Bréal, l.c., pp. 43 ff., who lays stress on the influence of Public Games 
on the //iad. His general conclusion agrees almost exactly with mine. 


188 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC VII 


sequently it was not an early epic at all, but a learned poem 
composed in Athens at some time between Euripides and Plato, 
when there existed a reading public. This view, as it stands, 
is opposed to much that we regard as certain about early Greek 
literature ; but Paley’s arguments have never been answered, and 
the difficulty is a real one.! 

Now here, as it happens, the very first fact certainly known 
about the //ad and Odyssey comes to our aid. They were 
performed at the Panathenaea at Athens, just as tragedies were 
performed at the Dionysia. They were recited, not by one 
bard, but by relays of bards in competition. The order was 
fixed, the next bard having to begin where the last left off. 
These festivals meant much more in ancient life than any 
similar ceremony at the present day. In drama and epos, as in 
other things, the ancients were accustomed to rarer and more 
prolonged indulgences than we, their weaker descendants. After 
waiting four years for a full-dress epic recitation they expected 
something ἄμεμπτον, which no one could call insufficient. The 
Panathenaea was the greatest of all Athenian festivals, recur- 
ring once in four years and lasting several days. Established 
in the sixth century, it formed the occasion for the gathering 
of all the Ionians from their diverse settlements under the wing 
of the great ‘ Metropolis’ or mother-city, who was their champion 
and leader against the barbarian. The Panathenaean recitation 
exactly explains what without it would be inexplicable in the 
form and size of the /Zad and Odyssey. 

The fact may suggest to us a question. What, after all, is 
the meaning of the name ‘Panathenaea’? Who are the ‘ All- 
Athenaioi’ for whom the feast is made? Not the Athenians 
themselves; that would give no meaning to the ‘Pan’. The 
answer occurs immediately. Who can the ‘ All-Athenians’ be 

1 There is some answer to Paley in Geddes, Prodlem of the Homeric 
Poems, Appendix A. My own view will come out in Chapter XII. Roughly 
speaking, I think Paley erred because he still operated with a single poet, 
who created the whole //iadabout 415 B.c. If he had grasped the conception 
of a Traditional Book, and argued that work was still being done upon the 
Iliad, that it was being edited with a view to readers, instead of audiences, as 
late as 415 and even later, I think he would have proved his case. See Paley, 
Remarks on Prof. Mahaffy’s account of the rise and progress of Epic Poetry 
(Bell, 1881), Post-Epic or imitative words in Homer (Norgate), Homert quae 


nunc exstant an religuis Cycli carminibus antiguiora jure habita sint (Nor- 
gate). Also Sayce’s Appendix to vol. iof Mahaffy’s Classical Greek Literature. 


ee ie Se .-. 


Vil MEANING OF ‘PANATHENAIOT’ 189 


but the very people whom Athens was then shepherding, and 
whose universal character was that they were ‘all sprung from 
Athens’? Twelve cities in especial called themselves Ionian, 
and had their great meeting at the feast of the Panionia at Cape 
Mycale. But they were not more Ionian than many other cities, 
says Herodotus: ‘In reality all are Ionians who are sprung 
from Athens and keep the Apaturia’—an Athenian festival 
(i. 147). Only, he observes, many of them, and especially the 
Athenians (143), avoid the name, and do not wish to be called 
‘Tonians’, Exactly ; the name ‘ Athenaioi’ was more honourable ; 
it was also wider in range. For it included those various cities 
that did not belong to the Ionian Twelve, but admitted that 
they were ‘sprung from Athens’! The informal league of 
which Athens was chief, at a time when ‘the Ionian race was 
of lowest account, and had no city of weight, except only Athens’ 
(Hdt. i. 143), could have chosen no better name than ‘All- 
Athenians’ when it gathered for its great festival every fourth 
year, exactly at the same time when the great Dorian gatherings 
met for the Pythian games at Delphi. 

And, to return to the Z/ad, what after all is its essential 
story? Is it not the story of the battle of All-Greeks 
against the barbarians of Asia? ‘All-Greeks’: the won- 
derful word rings out again and again in the poems—what 
though it comes chiefly in later parts, and against the tradition 
of the epic style? It is a modern formation, markedly out of 
tone; forcing itself in just because it so exactly expresses the 
meaning for which the older language had no word. ‘Pan- 
achaioi’, you will say, or ‘ Panhellénes’; not ‘Panidnes’. True, 
Homer uses generally the older and more dignified term, 
‘ Achaioi’, to denote the whole race whom the Italians called 
‘Graeci’, the Asiatics ‘I4ones’, the Greeks themselves in later 
days ‘Hellenes’, The Ionians knew this, and even claimed 
themselves to be not only ‘Iones’ and ‘ Athenaioi’, but also 
‘ Achaioi’. To justify the claim they brought their founders 
from Achaia. In later times, at any rate, they had the legend 
that, while coming ultimately from Athens, their ancestors had 

1 The theory that the Ionians were all sprung from Athens may not, of 


course, have had much historical foundation. That difficult problem does 
not here concern us. 


190 THE RISEVOF “THE GREEK ePIC VII 


gone quite out of their way and stayed for a time in the little 
district of the Peloponnese which was called by that name (Hdt. 
i. 145)... Paniones, Panhellenes, Panachaioi, and at last Pan- 
athenaioi; there is the same conception behind all these names, 
only some minor differences of time or of local centre. It is 
a union of men of Hellenic civilization against the multitudes 
of eastern barbarism. 

In many ways the Pisistratean festival of ‘ All-Athenians’ 
forms exactly the occasion for which our /Zad might have been 
composed. The poem is not Athenian in the special sense, 
but ‘ All-Athenian’ in the sense just explained is exactly what it 
is. It is Pan-Achaean; from the point of view of Ionia it is 
Pan-Hellenic. If it breathes the spirit of any single city it is 
that mother-city which was claiming to be the champion and 
the centre of all who stood as Greeks against the barbarians 
of Asia. We know of no city except Athens which could have 
fostered a Hellenism so broad, so utterly un-parochial. Besides 
this, if we are to believe some recent researchers, the ordinary 
armour of the poems, the ordinary men’s dress, the women’s 
dress, the conception of the appearance of the gods and much 
of the actual religion of the two poems, seem to tally exactly 
with Athens of the sixth or fifth century, and do not suit any 
earlier period of which we have historical knowledge. These 
broad facts are so strong and far-reaching that we need not 
lay stress on the so-called Athenian interpolations—on the 
statement that the almost unknown Athenian, Menestheus, was 
the greatest ‘ marshaller of men and horse’ (B 554) in the army, 
that Orestes came home ‘from Athens’ (y 307) and not from 
Phocis, or that Athena, when seeking her natural abode, went 
into the ‘ House of Erechtheus on the Athenian acropolis’ (7 81): 
we need not debate whether the fact that Nestor’s son in the 
Odyssey (y, 6, 0) bears the fictional name ‘ Pisistratus’ is based 
upon a compliment, or whether the verse ‘ 7udtitude of masters 
zs no good thing, let there be one master’ (B 204) is a manifesto, 
undetected and unexpurgated, in favour of the mild Tyrant 
of Athens. Beyond all doubt the influence of the Panathenaic 
recitation upon our poems was immense. Yet, though it in- 
fluenced it cannot have created. The language was there 

* On this point cf. Wilamowitz, Die lonische Wanderung and Panionion. 


VII IONIC FESTIVALS 1g! 


before, pre-Attic and pre-Ionic, already established as the 
correct vehicle for epic. As to the Attic forms, apart from mere 
errors of copyists, they do seem to prove the existence of Attic 
poets, composing in good epic style, but occasionally, in spite of 
all skill and care, slipping into their own dialect. It may well 
be that the first emergence of a written Iliad which we could 
recognize as such took place in Athens in the sixth century ; but, 
if so, it was a re-composing of old themes out of old words and 
verses and formulae.! 

Behind the recorded Panathenaic recitation there must lie 
long years of unrecorded recitation at various great Ionian 
gatherings, Pisistratus, or whoever he was, must have taken 
over to Athens an institution already existing in Ionia. One 
thinks first of the Panionia, the great gathering feast of the 
Twelve Cities at Cape Mycale. That is the obvious correlative 
_ to the Panathenaea. And there is some confirmatory evidence. 
It has been remarked long since that, among the Homeric gods, 
there stand out three who are never jeered at or made ridiculous ; 
two of them really grand figures, Poseidon and Apollo; the 
third, at least a very faithful and formidable partisan of 
the Greek cause, Pallas Athena, who is especially prominent 
in the very latest additions to the Odyssey. Athena was the 
patroness of Athens in general, and in particular the visible 
champion of Pisistratus. Poseidon and Apollo were the two 
patron gods of the Panionia at Cape Mycale. 

Or one might think of the great four-yearly festival at Delos, 
at which the Homeric hymn to Apollo was sung by ‘the blind 
minstrel of craggy Chios’ to a gathering of all the ‘long-robed 
Ionians’, The gods would suit almost equally well. About 
this festival there is a curious passage in Thucydides (iii, 104). 
In narrating how the Athenians in 426 b.c. ‘purified’ the 
island of Delos, he mentions that Pisistratus had purified it 
before, though not completely. He had moved only those 
pollutions that were in sight of Apollo’s temple. He continues 
his narrative of the doings of 426 :— 


And the Four-yearly festival was then celebrated by the 
Athenians for the first time since (or, after) the purifica- 


1 Wackernagel, Sprachliche Untersuchungen zu Homer, 1916. Cauer, 
PP- 99-136. 


192 THE “RISE ΘΕ THE ‘GREEK EPIC Vil 


tion. ‘There used to be in quite ancient days a gathering 
of the Ionians and the neighbouring islanders to Delos. 
They came to the games with their wives and children, 
as the Ionians still go to the festival at Ephesus, There 
was a gymnastic contest and a contest of minstrels, and the 
various cities sent dances to the gods. 


This seems to say that the Athenians in 426 celebrated the 
feast for the first time since the cleansing of the island by 
Pisistratus. If so, much would become clear. We could suppose 
that, when Pisistratus cleansed the island and made the old fair 
or gathering-place sacred and ‘ untreadable’ (ἄβατον), the Delia 
naturally came to an end, and the contest of minstrels was 
transferred to Athens, as the federal treasure was transferred 
afterwards. 

We sometimes find Homeric critics, misled by mediaeval 
analogies, discussing whether the Homeric poems are ‘Court 
poetry’ or‘ popular poetry’, and generally deciding in favour 
of the former. But the parallel does not hold. The poems 
do not show consistently the marks of either style. There is 
high and prolonged artistic tension, there is no buffoonery or 
vulgarity, there is an implication of dignity and culture in the 
audience as well as the poet. So far we are reminded of court 
poetry. On the other hand, they contain no flattery towards 
any patron, no glorification of any special royal house, no hinted 
demands for bakshish, no affectation of language. They go 
into neither pigeon-hole. And very naturally so. For we 
know from history that they were recited to an audience and 
on an occasion completely different. They were recited at a 
Panegyris, one of those solemn Pan-Hellenic gatherings which 
formed the centre of so much of the higher life of Greece.! 


There is the conventional mixed dialect, the conventional 
generalized religion, best explained by the mixed and pan- 
hellenic atmosphere of the whole occasion. There is a sacred 
truce between all Greek cities. No Greek is an enemy; no 
race or tribe of Greeks is maligned or satirized. There is war 


1 The French Epic, Le Pelerinage de Charlemagne, was composed for the 
Fair at St. Denys known as L’Endit. Bédier, op. cit., thinks that recitation 
at the mixed gatherings of the great pilgrim centres explains the conventional 
mixed dialect of the Chansons de Geste. 


— 


VII GREEK AND HEBREW 193 


in the air, but it is not a war of neighbour against neighbour 
in the common way of the mainland, it is a war of All-Hellenes 
against the Barbarian, yet a war in which the Dorian nobles, 
the martial aristocracy of Greece, are strangely ignored.! There 
is the religious ewphemza or avoidance of evil words, which is 
known to have been incumbent at these festivals and which 
probably explains not only much of Homer’s expurgation of 
ancient legends, but his deliberate abstinence from all those 
notes of horror and ghastliness which are common in the rest 
of early epic tradition as well as in Attic tragedy. Apollo was 
more insistent on euphemia than Dionysos. 

What a difference, after all, there is between the Greek and 
the Hebrew traditional book! The general process at work was 
much the same in both, but a great divergence must have begun 
early. The Hebrew reviser, except where religious motives 
came into play, tampered so little with his wording. He took his 
raw material just as it was, and copied it out, merely inserting his 
introductory and connecting formulae, smoothing out contradic- 
tions, and correcting the orthodoxy of his authorities where they 
needed it. A Homeric scholar cannot but be surprised at the 
extreme ease with which interpolations in the Hebrew writings 
often betray themselves. They are made quite undisguisedly, 
with no artifice and sometimes no regard for grammar.? No 
Greek editor ever dreamed of doing his business like that. For 
every Son of Homer was himself a poet, and kept modifying 
and working up into poetry everything that he touched. 

Consider the ultimate purpose to which the literature was 
destined in either case, and most of the differences in form and 
spirit will follow. The Hebrew scriptures became, to use the 
rather strange technical term, ‘books that defile the hands’. 
That is, they were holy: after touching them you must wash 


1 One might compare, allowing for differences of date and circumstance, 
the exhortations of Lysias and of Isocrates at Olympia, delivered to an 
audience representing the whole of Greece. 

2 For instance, the older phrase ‘the Ark’ was expanded by later editors 
into ‘the Ark of the Covenant’, or ‘the Ark of the Covenant of Yahweh’. 
Now an elementary rule of Hebrew grammar is that a noun in the construct 
case (i.e., in our terminology, followed by another noun in the genitive) cannot 
have the definite article. Yet these pious correctors did not venture to delete 
the article before ‘Ark’. They preferred to leave the utterly ungrammatical 
phrase N23 PNA (Josh. iii, 14) or (2. 17) 17 ΤΥ ANA, 


2760 O 


194 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC VII 


your hands before touching any mundane thing. They were 
kept sacred and apart. Their purpose was to be read aloud 
accurately letter by letter in the synagogue for the instruction of 
the people. If a member of the audience was not interested, 
more shame tohim. No one dreamed of imputing any blame to 
the writings. 

But the Greek traditions from the very outset were made into 
Lays to be recited by bards for the delectation of the company. 
If men were not interested, it was the fault of the bard and his 
poems. And in the very earliest times of Greece we meet with 
that characteristic and only half praiseworthy Greek institution, 
the public competitive recitation. The poems became, in the 
Greek phrase, ἐπιδεικτικά, things of display. The bards who 
knew the traditions came to recite at the great games and 
gatherings. Each recited his own poems—i.e. those that he 
‘ possessed’, not necessarily those that he had composed—and 
tried to make them more attractive than other people’s. He was 
bound, of course, not to violate history too grossly; not to be 
ψευδής, or ‘ false-speaking ’, above all, not to be ignorant. But 
he might, by the help of the Muses, tell his audience a great deal 
more about the heroes than by any human means he was likely 
to know. He might transfer incidents from one legend to 
another, he might alter names or disregard times and places, 
provided the change really made his poem better and did not stir 
his hearers to contradiction. He could work up the known 
incidents till they became more and more moving, more edifying, 
or more pleasing. An element was thus admitted which leavened 
the whole lump, an element which, in the hands of a less wonder- 
fully gifted people, must, one would think, have led to bombast 
and vulgarity, but which was somehow stopped when it had done 
its maximum of good and was only just started on its career 
of evil; I mean that strange mixed passion known to all artists, 
which consists, at its higher end, in the pure love of beautiful or 
noble creation, and, at its lower end, in conscious strain for the 
admiration of an audience. 


VIll 


THe HISTORICAL, CONTENT OF TIE 
ILIAD 


ONE of the last letters which I received from Andrew Lang 
before his death contained the words ‘ The next thing Homeric 
critics will go mad about is historicity’, Far be it from me to 
say that the prophecy has been fulfilled, but a fashion has set in 
somewhat violently in favour of accepting the poems as histori- 
cally valid. This makes a new cross-division among Homeric 
scholars. Some of the strictest ‘ Unitarians’, naturally enough, 
take the sceptic side and treat the poems as mere fiction, and 
some of the most radical analysers talk cheerfully of pre-Homeric 
‘documents’ and ‘archives’, which it would be a sin to doubt. 

Euhemerus, as we all know, started a great movement in 
ancient theology by the hypothesis that the Greek gods were all 
real men, and the myths about them real facts embroidered and 
exaggerated, and some of the champions of historicity apply his 
method with the same impartiality to the whole Greek tradition. 
They are prepared to believe in the reality of Dionysus, Asclepius 
and even Hippolytus, and think that very likely Cadmus did 
follow a cow and build a city where it lay down: why should 
not he? I cannot generally agree with these scholars, but I 
think it likely that their method when critically applied may 
sometimes yield historical results. They profit, for example, by a 
comparison of the Egyptian and Assyrian records and the 
researches of anthropologists.! It is at least possible that the 
mythical Amazons represent some real race of nomads who 
seemed to be female because they were beardless; that the 
Golden Fleece may well come from real fleeces which were used 
to collect gold dust in the rivers of Phasis; that the King of 

1 See particularly Myres and Frost, Historical Background of the Trojan 
War, in Kio, xiv (1915). 
O 2 


196 THE RISE OF THE GREEK: EPIC VII 


Troy may have had a real golden candlestick with seven branches, 
which he obtained from the Assyrians or Hittites; or even that 
the Flight of Danaos with his fifty daughters to escape the sons of 
Aigyptos may have been connected with the defeat of the Danauna 
by the Egyptians about 1200 B.C.’ But this general problem lies 
outside our special task. We have to face a more particular one. 
Some learned and distinguished writers, such as Dr. Leaf and 
Professor Chadwick, take the view that, while the Greek myths 
as a whole are more or less futile and negligible, the Homeric 
narrative is largely historical and correct. It is argued that it 
fairly represents the central thread of Greek tradition ; that it is 
in the main reasonable and in accordance with possibility ; that 
it is not violently contradicted by itself or by known facts outside 
it; and, lastly, that in most myths, amid all the nebula of 
exaggeration, fancy, and mere muddle, there is apt to be an 
historical nucleus without which the nebula could not have 
formed. 

To take these points in order, in what sense do the Poems 
form the main or central thread of Greek tradition? We know 
that from about the sixth century onwards Homer formed the 
staple of Greek education. Every one knew Homer, and all parts 
of Greece accepted him. Consequently, any local tradition 
which conflicted with Homer tended to die out, or else to be 
trimmed and fitted into consistency with him. So much will be 
agreed. Now, the Poems formed the dominant Greek tradition, 
not in the least because historical research showed them to be 
true, but because they were such good and successful poems. 
They constituted the /ad/e convenue, and surely, if ever we have 
to choose between the /ad/e convenue and some stubborn frag- 
ment of inconsistent local tradition which for some reason 
continued to maintain itself in the teeth of the prevailing fashion, 
at first blush an historian’s preference should be for the latter. 
I do not, of course, suggest that it is necessarily true. Hecataeus 


* Problems arise about the definitely Minoan objects which occur in 
Homeric and Attic poetry: e.g. sword inlaid with racing horses, Eur. 22. 
476 ; dog-and-fawn buckle, τ 228 ff.; Skylla (dog-headed sea-monster), » 86 ff. ; 
man clinging under ram’s belly, « 432 ff.; snake and eagle, Soph. Azz. 126 ; 
cf. Evans, Palace, i, pp. 274, 666, 698, 715. The explanation is probably 
κειμήλια in families or temples 2225 popular tradition. I see no trace of 
Minoan ‘documents’. See above, p. 168. 


vir IS THE HOMERIC NARRATIVE HISTORICAL? 107 


found the traditions of the Greeks ‘many and ridiculous’, but 
those of them which answer the above test deserve more respect 
than most, and at least compare favourably with ‘the lies of the 
poets’. But almost more dangerous than the lies of the poets are, 
I think, the devices of the harmonizers. For example, if Homer 
says that Hector was buried in Troy, and the Thebans in histo- 
rical times are found worshipping his tomb in Thebes, we shall 
not, if we are prudent, try to get out of the difficulty by accepting 
the explanation that Hector was, of course, really buried as 
Homer said, but that later no doubt,—though no ancient writer 
happens to mention it,—in obedience to an oracle the Thebans 
sent to Troy to dig up his bones. Or again, if the Homeric 
Catalogue makes the Boeotians the central force of Agamemnon’s 
army, occupying the whole of Boeotia, while the rest of Homer 
almost ignores their existence and Thucydides says that they 
were first driven from Thessaly into Boeotia sixty years after 
the Trojan War, we shall not solve that contradiction by accepting 
the suggestions of old historians that perhaps a small section 
(ἀποδασμός) were already in Boeotia before the Trojan War, or 
that perhaps they all came in before the War and were all 
unexpectedly driven out and returned again. Such hypothescs 
are generally figments invented to explain a difficulty, and, after 
all, do not explain it. 

But then, it will be said, the Homeric narrative is in the main 
so reasonable and possible, and the Homeric characters make 
such an impression of reality! ‘Contrast the Z/ad’, says 
Dr. Leaf, ‘with the 4rgonautica with its shadowy characters 
and its abundantly miraculous incidents,’ But surely to argue 
thus is to put oneself at the mercy of the story-teller. By such 
canons Pexdennis and Resurrection would be historical, and the 
Soug of Roland not. As a matter of fact, the Argonautica 
contains, as no doubt Dr. Leaf would admit, a great deal of 
historical deposit : the passage of the Bosphorus, the exploration 
of the Euxine, the discovery of strange tribes and perhaps of 
gold dust in rivers. But it is composed in the romantic and 
miraculous style, while the Z/ad is full of σωφροσύνη and veri- 
similitude. Thus Professor Chadwick shows by examples that the 
carrying off of a princess was in the Homeric Age a quite possible 
cause of war, and invites us therefore to believe in an historic 


198 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC VIII 


Rape of Helen. Dr. Leaf has madea careful reconstruction of the 
walls of Troy and shows that the chase of Hector round them was 
nowise impossible. But the critics who doubted the truth of these 
stories never, as far as I know, doubted their possibility. It is 
not likely that a Homeric poet engaged in fiction would, with ali 
the world before him, deliberately choose a fiction that was in- 
credible. It isa matter of style and of artistic competence. 

‘But at least the Homeric story is seldom or never contradicted 
by known facts.’ Here again, as I have already ventured to sug- 
gest, critics have been misled by a point of style; I mean the deli- 
berate care with which the Homeric poets, and indeed most poets 
in the classical tradition, avoid committing themselves to details. 
We have noticed it in the matter of the shields and the armour. 
Scholars and poets innumerable have read the descriptions of the 
Homeric battles, and in their mind’s eye have clad the heroes in 
the most diverse styles of armour without ever coming on a flat 
contradiction. ‘That could never happen to readers of Marmion 
or The Lady of the Lake. It is much the same with the topo- 
graphy. The rivers of Troy, Scamander and Simois, are vividly 
presented to our imaginations. But no hint whatever is given of 
where they lie, and all geographers agree that the one definite 
topographical statement which the poems have been rash enough 
to make about them cannot be true. They cannot have run 
into one another (E 774). Such slips are exceedingly rare. As 
a rule, all descriptions are merely generical. Think of the 
innumerable ships that are mentioned in the Odyssey. Most of 
them have their suitable epithets. They are ‘hollow’, ‘black’, 
‘even’, ‘rowed on both sides’, ‘swift’, and sometimes ‘red- 
cheeked’. Yet not one, if I remember rightly, has any single 
definite quality to separate it from any of the others. It is much 
the same with rivers, plains, mountains, harbours, and all else 
that goes to make up that beautiful and heroic, but strangely 
standardized, world. There are indeed some topographical 
details in Ithaca, and a vast deal of trouble they have given. 
There is far less detail about the Plain of Troy. Dr. Leaf appeals 
with much apparent force to the success with which his topo- 
graphical reconstructions can be built up without contradicting 
Homer. He thinks it is due to Homer’s geography being exact 
and true, and would have us believe in the location even of the 


VIII THE NUCLEUS THEORY 199 


Ford and the Wild Fig Tree. His work is so beautifully done 
that it is with real regret that I find myself reflecting that other 
travellers have made quite different reconstructions with almost 
equal success, at any rate, in avoiding any contradiction by the 
text of Homer. 

The theory of the historical nucleus surrounded by a nebula 
of fanciful or mythical additions seems at first sight attractive. 
An Indian god, Nikal Seyn, has grown up with mythical appurte- 
nances round the solid figure of John Nicholson. Another has 
grown round Sir Courtenay Ilbert, or rather, since the name of 
the god appears to be Illabuttabil rather than Illabutta, round 
the famous Bill associated with his name. We are told in the 
mediaeval life of Alexander the Great how Iskander Khan once 
flew on an eagle with the Prophet Elijah to obtain the water of 
life. And so, it is argued, there is a przma facie case for 
believing in the reality of Achilles, Agamemnon, Helen, and the 
rest. But, in the first place, what kind of ‘ historicity ’ would this 
be? What single true fact should we know of Alexander, Ilbert, 
or Nicholson, from the stories cited? Names and nothing more. 
Nay, not even the names, for, after all, it was not Ibert but the 
Ilbert Bill that has taken divine form in the myth, and Iskander 
Khan is not quite the same name as Alexandros. But further, 
what is nucleus and what is nebula? The historic Alexander is 
not the nucleus which has attracted the Eagle story: that story is 
the nucleus which has attracted one famous name after another. 
It was told of Gilgamesh, the Babylonian, long before Alexander 
was heard of, and of a Sumerian, Etanna, before the days of 
Gilgamesh. That is a very important fact in large masses of 
stories. Even if an historical name does occur, the nucleus is not 
history but fancy. If Hamlet was the name of a real Danish 
prince, the story of Hamlet was considerably older than his day. 
Most of us know nothing of St. George except that he killed the 
dragon. Gibbon, indeed, identified him with a fraudulent army 
contractor who supplied bacon to certain forces in Cappadocia, 
but Gibbon, it seems, was merely yielding to the seductions of 
‘historicity’. The truth about St. George is said to be quite 
different. There was a very ancient bas-relief at Lydda repre- 
senting a hero slaying a gigantic monster. The Christians ° 
called him George, but the Greeks before that called him Perseus, 


200 THE RISE ΟΕ THE GREEK EPIC VIII 


while the Babylonians were confident that he was their favourite 
Gilgamesh killing Tiamat. There is a canon of Pope Gelasius 
establishing the canonization of St. George which prudently refers 
to him as one of those ‘ whose names are justly revered among men, 
but whose acts are known only to God’. If that is historicity, we 
need not grudge it to Agamemnon. And, further, when once 
the goddess of fiction has really set to work, surely the quality 
of the original peg or nucleus shows very little in the finished 
product. There is a character in Kenzlworth called Weyland 
Smith. He was originally the Norse god, Wielant, Icelandic 
Voliindr, but in Kezz/worth he has just as solid flesh and blood 
as Tony Foster or Amy Robsart, whose bodies now lie ia 
Cumnor Church. When Attila the Hun or Guthhere the 
Burgundian is drawn into the Saga of the Volsungs and Nibelungs 
there is no visible quality to show which of those gigantic cloudy 
figures were originally made of mist and which of bone and 
muscle. Nay, even where a real person is taken over to fiction 
and in the fiction remains vividly real and palpable, what guarantee 
have we that the fiction, because life-like, is true to life? Sir John 
Oldcastle, the Lollard, was a man of eminent piety and high 
character. The report of his trial for heresy is still extant. 
Yet when he became a favourite character on the Elizabethan 
stage (where in Shakespeare’s later work his name was 
eventually changed to Falstaff) he was an extraordinary and 
shining type of all the most un-Lollardish failings, while innocent 
as a babe of the crime of heresy. 

Modern instances have largely to be taken from fiction. We 
do not in modern times find faded gods turning into heroes, 
except in odd cases like Weyland Smith. That is merely 
because we have no mythological gods. But the Greeks had 
numbers of them, and their mythology, as soon as literature 
begins, appears as the commonest source for poetical composition 
and the ordinary food for popular imagination. In modern India, 
under our eyes, as the great gods and goddesses of the plain 
conquer new territory, the local gods whom they supersede are 
very apt to become their human votaries or door-keepers. 
There is certainly no ground in general literature for denying 
that gods may become men. 


1 In Pollard, Reprints of Fifteenth Century Verse and Prose. 


VIII FICTION, MYTH, HISTORY 201 


Bearing these cautions in mind we may proceed to our problem. 
In most traditional poems there are three fairly distinct elements. 
There are masses of mere fiction—that is, stories and personages 
deliberately invented by the poet out of his head. There are, 
secondly, the shapes of myth and saga, which the poet narrates 
in good faith, as he received them, with at least a modicum of 
belief in their reality. And, thirdly, there are fragments of 
definite history. Take the Vzbe/ungenhed, for instance. There 
the whole web of the story is woven on lines of romantic fiction. 
But many of the characters, the Niblungs and Odin and 
apparently Sigurd himself, belong to the region of myth. 
Again, we have historical persons in Atli, who is the Hunnish 
King Attila, and Dietrich of Berne, who is the real Theodoric. 

In Homer we may make the same sort of division. There is, 
in the first place, much deliberate fiction. The whole frame- 
work into which the incidents are fitted, the wanderings of 
Telemachus in the Odyssey, the Embassy to Achilles in Z/ad I, 
are evidently mere inventions of the poets. On the other hand, 
such beings as Zeus, Hephaestus, Bellerophon, Typhoeus, the 
Chimaera, clearly belong to the realm of myth. And, thirdly, 
the excavations have proved the historical reality of the great 
towns of Troy and Mycenae. As to the persons, it is a different 
matter, Professor Chadwick persuasively argues that Heroic 
Ages are rich in striking and picturesque personalities, who find 
a place in poetry not because of their historical importance but 
because of some purely romantic or adventurous interest. If so, 
they will obviously become almost indistinguishable from the 
heroes of fiction. If there are any Attilas and Theodorics hidden 
among the various gods and tribal heroes, there is unfortunately 
no independent historical document by which to identify them. 

Now, as to the fictional parts of Homer, I do not wish to dwell 
upon the value of fiction as indirect history. One might point 
out that fiction, to adopt a phrase of Aristotle’s, if it does not tell 
you what did take place on a given occasion, constantly shows 
you what might well take place. And even where the main 
subject of the fiction is romantic or marvellous the background 
or setting in which it is placed is very likely to be drawn from 
normal life. The Cyclops, for instance, is a fictitious monster ; 
but his processes of dairy-farming are real and historical. And 


202 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC VIII 


that kind of information is sometimes what helps us most toward 
the understanding of a far-off state of society. If the Z/ad and 
Odyssey were all fiction we should still learn from them a great 
deal about early Greek customs, about practices of war and of 
government, about marriage, land-tenure, worship, farming, 
commerce, and, above all, the methods of seafaring. Let any 
one read thoughtfully the story which Eumaeus the swineherd 
tells of his life in Odyssey 0, and then consider how much history 
of the life of the Aegean, about the seventh century B.C., he has 
learnt from three pages of poetical fiction. In the same way, 
even if the main story of the //zad is fiction, it is significant that 
the social world in which it is placed is curiously like the real 
world of an ‘Heroic Age’. Figures like Diomedes, Ajax, and 
Odysseus, as they appear in the //zad, wandering chieftains with 
a band of followers and some ships instead of a kingdom or even 
a fatherland, are typical; and Achilles and Agamemnon hardly 
less so. We have here the greatest of the general differences 
between the Catalogue in B and the rest of the 7#ad. For the 
Catalogue starts with a conception of Greece as a settled country 
divided into clans and kingdoms, and has fastened each Homeric 
chieftain down to a fixed geographical district. 

The historical value of the Catalogue has been recently dis- 
cussed in two striking books.! It is by general agreement an 
alien document, written by some non-Homeric author or authors 
for a non-Homeric context, and afterwards, with omissions and 
additions, incorporated in the Zéad. Mr. Allen, like an advocate 
fighting for a client's life, endeavours with great learning to show 
that there is no flat contradiction in terms between the Catalogue 
and the rest of the //zad, and no statement which is demonstrably 
untrue of an age before our records begin. It is pretty certainly 
of Boeotian origin and connected with the school of Hesiod; and 
there is reason to suspect that it had been used in the CySrza 
before it was put into the 7Zad? But here arises an interesting 
question of principle. When it differs from the rest of the //ad, 
which is more likely to be historically true? The dull list οἱ 
names and figures, with not much apparent reason for existence 


1 Leaf, Homer and History, 1915; T. W. Allen, 716 Homeric Catalogue 
of Ships, 1921. Also Leaf, 7voy, 1912, on the Catalogue of Trojan Allies. 
2 See p. 179 and cf. Appendix J, note. 


VIII THE CATALOGUE 403 


except as a record of fact, or the brilliant and moving narrative, 
exposed to all the temptations of fiction? One would say the 
Catalogue; and probably this in some sense holds good. It 
probably does represent some genuine belief, based on tradition 
and perhaps helped out by guesswork, held by a school of bards 
in Boeotia about the condition of Greece at the time of the 
Trojan War. Certainly it is not a deduction from the /Zad. It 
is a deduction from other sources and, as such, an early historical 
document of great interest. 

Dr. Leaf has shown, in my judgement beyond the possibility 
of refutation, that the whole point of view of the Catalogue is 
very different from that of the αὐ. The prominence of 
Boeotia, the gathering of the fleet at Aulis, the strange Corin- 
thian kingdom which is all that is left to Agamemnon after 
Argo shas been taken away and given to Diomedes, the large 
navies provided by the Arcadians and other inland peoples who 
never appear again in the //zad, are all ‘un-Homeric’. Also, we 
may be sure that the document was not put into the //ad early. 
It was put in late. The fitting-in is mechanical and shows the 
joints: it has not been either re-created by a poet or frequently 
worked over by skilled rhapsodes. Of course, to be ‘un- 
Homeric’, or even to be ‘late’, is not necessarily to be untrue. 
Yet on most of the points of difference the Catalogue version 
does seem improbable. 

Truth must have been lost in the course of the Catalogue’s 
history in at least three ways. The original Boeotian authors 
doubtless tended to exaggerate the importance of Boeotia ; the 
Athenian reciters, who had the poem in their hands from the 
time of the Panathenaic recitation onwards, are shown both by 
external and internal evidence to have affected the text a good 
deal, more perhaps by omission than by interpolation. Twelve 
passages in the Catalogue are known to have been marked as 
spurious by ancient critics, most of them for reasons in some way 
connected with Athens. Modern critics have detected others. 
Again, if one looks for the important places which are ‘sup- 
pressed’ or belittled in the Catalogue they form a list which is 
hard to understand until we ask what places_a tactful reciter 
would be likely to suppress when competing for a prize before 
an Athenian audience; then it is intelligible: Aegina, Megara, 


204 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC vill 


Thebes, Delphi, and to some extent Salamis and Corinth. Then, 
again, the adaptation of the Catalogue to its place in the Ziad 
must have involved some changes of statement, made in the 
interest of harmony and not of truth. 

And, even when the document was intact, before any of these 
perversions had begun, what was it? The other catalogues give 
lists of goddesses who had human children, of heroines who had 
divine lovers, of ancestresses of various tribes, of rivers, of 
Nereids, of lucky and unlucky days. The Catalogue of Ships, 
and even that of the Trojan Allies, so brilliantly expounded by 
Dr. Leaf, was perhaps based on less speculative foundations, 
but can hardly claim an impeccable authority.1 

I do not think that we have in the Homeric Poems any 
‘document’ or ‘archive’ which can claim on its own authority 
a right to be accepted as true. But I wish at present to deal 
with a different question, viz. the origins, historical or otherwise, 
of some typical characters or incidents in the Poems. First, let 
us take a character of pure fiction,? Many might be cited: the 
herald ᾿Ηπυτίδης, the bard Φήμιος Τερπιάδης, many of the 
Phaeacians in θΘ 11 ff. and the Nereids in ¥ 39 ff, with their 
transparent names. The most striking, perhaps, is Briseis, the 
maiden who is taken by Agamemnon from Achilles and thus 
becomes the passive heroine of the Wrath. She has no father 
or mother: no history apart from the one incident for which she 
is invented and which is presumably an invented incident; as 
before mentioned, she has not even a real name. For Kouré 
Lriseis only means ‘ Maiden of Brisa ’,? the Aeolic form of Brésa, 
a town in Lesbos, taken by Achilles in the course of the war. 
It is worth noticing, indeed, that, like other characters in good 
fiction, Briseis eventually acquired independent legendary life 
and even rose to some importance in Chaucer and Shakespeare, 
under the name of Cressida. (Cressida is the accusative ‘ Bri- 
seida’ slightly corrupted, and confused with the name of the 
other maiden, Chryseis.) 


1 The Trojan Allies lie along an ancient trade route; Leaf, Z.c. 

* For the following, cf. E. Bethe, Homer und die Heldensage, from Neue 
Jahrbiicher f. d. klass. Alt., 1902; F. Diimmler, Heftor, Anhang ii to 
Studniczka’s Ayrene, 1890. Also Bethe’s Alarchen, Mythus und Sage, and 
Radermacher, Die Lrzihlungen der Odyssee (Vienna, 1915). 

5. Wilamowitz, HYom. Unt., p. 409; Tiimpel, Lesdzaka, p. 106. 


—— ΑΜΜΨΜΜΜοοοοο 


VIII BRISEIS: HELEN 205 


But in the //ad Briseis is a shadow, a figment of the poet. 
Contrast her, for instance, with a real saga-heroine, Helen. 
Helen appears in the Troy legend, but was certainly not created 
for it. She dominates other legends as well. We know her 
parents and her home. She was an important goddess, a 
marriage-Koré, in Sparta. Her temple at Therapnae has been 
excavated; she and her husband Menelaus were worshipped 
there together, ‘ not as heroes but as gods’, and she had sacred 
trees and wells in many places.1. In most of her functions she 
resembles the other Korai who preside over the affairs of women, 
but Helen has certain special characteristics. She is a Swan- 
child :? her mother may be Leda or may be Nemesis, her father 
Zeus or Tyndareus, but she is always the daughter of a white 
swan. Her brothers, the Dioscori, Castor and Polydeuces, are 
twins and also stars. She and they appear to sailors in time of 
storm as those balls of the fire that is called ‘St Elmo’s’. It 
used once to be ‘St Helen’s’, The chief point in her saga is 
quite clear: she is always being carried off by a ravisher. And, 
I venture to suggest, the origin of this trait is so clear that one 
can hardly understand its having so long escaped notice. A 
Spartan bride-goddess was bound to be carried off, since in 
Spartan marriages the carrying off of the bride was part of the 
ritual. The same set of ideas explains two other peculiarities of 
Helen, why she is always brought back from her ravishment and 
why she is so much associated with an L7d0/ou or Image,’ which 
is like Helen but is not the real Helen. In the ritual the Image 
of the goddess would probably be carried off, but would have to 
be secretly restored afterwards to its place in the temple. We 
have no detailed information about the rite at Sparta, but in 
Samos, where Hera was the marriage-goddess, her Image was 
regularly carried off in the Feast called Tonaia, and then secretly 
recovered and brought back. 


1 Isocr. x. 72; Paus. iii. 19, 9; Theocr. xviii. 43 ff. &c. 

* Euripides revels in this white-swan atmosphere. Helen is ὄμμα κυκνόπτερον 
καλλοσύνας, Or. 1386. Cf. 1.4. 793; Hel. 214. 

8 The εἴδωλον occurs first in Hesiod: then in Stesichorus, Euripides, 
Herodotus, Plato, &c., and plays a great part in the later Greek literature: 
see reff. in Bergk, ?.Z.G., under the Padinxodia of Stesichorus. The old 
view that the Eiddlon story was a fiction of Stesichorus is clearly untenable. 
It is cited from Hesiod and has all the marks of genuine myth. (πρῶτος 
Ἡσίοδος “Ἑλένης τὸ εἴδωλον παρήγαγε. Schol, to Lycophron 822.) 


206 THE “RISE: OF THE GREEK EPIC VIII 


A third characteristic of Helen has also a marked ritual or 
sacral appearance. When she is restored, she is always restored 
by Twins or something very like Twins. She was carried off 
to Egypt by Hermes, to Sidon or else to Troy by Alexander- 
Paris, to Deceleia by Theseus or the Apharetidae ; but always 
recovered either by the so-called ‘Twin’ Atreidae or the genuinely 
Twin Dioscori. She was also carried off to Mount Parnon by a 
robber, and we do not happen to hear who brought her back. 
But I should be much surprised if the rescuers were not Spartans 
and Twins. 

Passing from the rich saga-figure of Helen, let us turn to the 
comparative barrenness of Achilles. Apart from the fine psycho- 
logical treatment of his character in the later books of the //ad, 
Achilles in saga is little more than a typical heroic Kouros, as 
Hermes and Apollo are divine Kouroi. Like all the Kouroi he 
is young, swift, tall, and beautiful; like Balder, Hyakinthos, 
Hippolytus, Adonis, Linos, and many others, he is cut short in 
his youth and ritually lamented: in the saga by a choir of 
Nereids, in actual life by choruses of women. The odd story of 
his dressing in girl’s clothes has pretty obviously a ritual origin. 
Even his many ‘ wraths’ or ‘strifes’,! which might look at first 
sight like the real memories left by a hot-tempered soldier, seem 
only to be derived from the regular ‘strife’ of the Kouros with 
his enemy, the Summer with the coming Winter, the New Year 
with the Old. The real history that we can legitimately extract 
from Achilles is, I venture to think, what we may call tribal 
history. Only we must remember that it was not exactly a tribe 
that Achilles led at Troy; it was a comzfatus, a mixed band of 
clansmen and strangers who followed the chief’s fortunes. But 
we know from Greek history that these mixed bands, when they 
founded cities, generally formed themselves into fictitious tribes 
and adopted common ancestors. The men who counted Achilles 
as their chief, Hellenes of Achaia Phthiotis, and the strangers 
who joined with them, did all that Achilles did. They left their 
home on the mainland: they stayed first at Skyros, till they 

1 Wraths with Agamemnon, one about Briseis, one because of a late invita- 
tion to dinner; with Diomedes; with Odysseus; with Thersites. All seem 
to have some oracular significance, as when Achilles strove with Odysseus 


and Agamemnon ‘rejoiced in heart because the bravest of Achaioi were at 
strife’—remembering an oracle. (4 78.) 


Vl TRIBAL HEROES: ACHILLES 207 


were grown strong: they conquered and occupied Lesbos. 
They fought on the Thracian coast. They eventually went 
through the Hellespont and Bosphorus up to the Black Sea, and 
made settlements which bore the name of Achilles in later ages. 
But there is something to be learned from studying the various 
places where Achilles was worshipped. The worship in Thessaly 
was, we are told, ordered from Dodona (Philostr. Herozcus, 
Pp. 741, quoting an interesting hymn to Thetis). This agrees 
well with Achilles’ prayer to Zeus of Dodona (II 233). It is 
natural enough, too, that he should be worshipped at Sigeum, 
at Skyros, at Mytilene, in the island of Leuce, and that inscrip- 
tions should be found at Olbia and Odessos calling him /ozd- 
archés, ‘Lord of the Pontus.’ But he had worship in other 
parts of Greece too. He was worshipped in Laconia, says the 
scholiast to Apollonius (iv. 815), citing Anaxagoras, Pausanias 
saw a great Achilleion, or shrine to Achilles, on the road from 
Sparta to Arcadia. There was worship at Brasiae; in Elis; in 
the island of Astypalaea ; probably in Cos, since the Aeacidae 
in general had a shrine there. And in Tarentum there were 
shrines both to the Aeacidae in general and to Achilles. What 
does this mean? Does it not destroy our conception of Achilles 
as a special tribal hero? No: it only serves to illustrate a point 
of cardinal importance for the understanding of prehistoric 
Greece, the extreme mobility and the frequent scattering of the 
various tribes. It is the natural result of that time when all 
Hellas was ἀνάστατος, ‘driven from its home’; the time of the 
‘constant war-paths and uprootings of peoples’. There were 
fragments of tribes cast away in the most diverse parts, and 
where they were strong enough they carried their tribal gods 
with them. The Achaioi, who settled in the Peloponnese and 
migrated again beyond it, naturally took with them the worship 
of Achilles. 

If any one would have a conception of the way in which tribes 
and races can be scattered, when in a mobile condition of life, I 
recommend him to look at some map of the linguistic stocks of 
the North American Indians! If the Iroquoian or Siouan or, 


1 e.g. Elisée Reclus, Géogr. Univ., Amérique, ii. 40 ἔ, Or, to take a less 
remote parallel, the Germanic tribe called Eruli ‘are first mentioned in the 
third century A.D., at which time they appear almost simultaneously on the 
Black Sea and the frontier of Gaul’, Chadwick, O¢hiz, p. 33. 


208 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC VIII 


still more, if the Athapascan-speaking races had been in the 
habit of building shrines to their tribal heroes, in what extra- 
ordinarily diverse parts of the vast continent we should find the 
heroa! And the Iroquoians would have made the Algonquins 
worship him too. The result would completely dwarf any 
strangeness which we may at first feel in the scattering of the 
shrines of Achilles from Tarentum to Odessos. He remains the 
hero or Louros of the people who followed him from Thessaly, 
of whom we can only say in Homer’s words that ‘ Myrmidones 
were they called and Hellénes and Achaioi’. 


The figure of Agamemnon presents unsolved problems. 
Famous as he is, there are comparatively few legends about him, 
and most of these belong to well-known mythical types. Yet 
the existence of some great federated Achaian expedition against 
Troy seems almost as certain as the destruction of Troy itself, 
and it presumably had some chief leader. The position of 
Agamemnon, in the Z/ad, asa ‘king’ with authority over all the 
other ‘ kings’, based not on lawor hereditary position, but onan 
ad hoc oath which they have all sworn, to serve him till Troy is 
taken, seems to correspond exactly with what we should, with 
our present knowledge, expect to be true of the Heroic Age. 
The Anax Andron looks like real history, whatever his name 
may have been. He would be a ‘Lord of Ships’, leading the 
Akhaiusha and the ‘ peoples of the sea’ or some offshoot of them. 
It is likely enough that his predecessors, with or without their 
comitatus, at some period had settled in Phrygia, which would 
explain why Agamemnon’s family are Pelopidae, sons of Pelops 
the Phrygian. 

He was a King of Kings. As such he steps into the inheri- 
tance of the regular King myths. Especially the old sequence 
of Ouranos-Gaia-Kronos, Kronos-Rhea-Zeus, is repeated in 
Agamemnon-Clytemnestra-Aigisthos. The Old King is slain by 
the Young King, who is helped by the Queen and then wedded 
to her: the Old Year slain by the Young Year, while the same 
Earth-Mother is wedded to all of them.!. An old beam or trunk 
of wood worshipped at Chaeronea becomes Agamemnon’s 
sceptre (Paus. ix. 40, 11), which even in the J/ad is a thing 


1 See my Shakespeare Lecture to the British Academy: Hamlet and Orestes. 


VIII AGAMEMNON 209 


of tradition (A 234 ff.). As King of Kings, also, he inevitably 
becomes involved in the Human Sacrifice of his daughter, 
Iphigeneia. It is regularly the King’s daughter who has to be 
sacrificed. Naturally, too, he is specially associated with Zeus, 
the greater King of Kings: his attendant and sacrificer (Aesch. 
Cho. 255, 358 ff.) and in various ways his special charge. 
Nay, we find a worship of Zeus-Agamemnon at Sparta, like that 
of Zeus-Lakedaimon (Hdt. vi. 56) or Zeus-Pelops. 

The peculiar manner of his death seems to ask for explanation. 
The legend tells that he was killed with an axe, in his bath, after 
being wrapt round and round in an enormous or ‘endless’ robe. 
Now the word for bath, dpoirn, also denoted the stone sarcophagi 
in which great potentates in pre- and post-classical times were 
wont to be buried. Can it be that in the Dark Age or later, 
when some of the royal graves at Mycenae were opened by 
peasants or robbers, a royal figure was found, its skull perhaps 
broken from a wound in battle, wrapped in a rich and royal 
winding-sheet and lying in a dpofrn? The finders would weave 
a story round it, as they did about the Tomb of Midas or the 
bas-reliefs of Sisyphus and Tantalus.1 

One is not surprised, if the historical King of Kings was 
a chief of the ships of the Akhaiusha, to find some difficulty in 
locating Agamemnon’s home. The Greek tradition wanted 
naturally to give him an empire on land. In the //ad he 
generally refers to his home as Argos; once or twice it is 
Mycenae rich in gold ; but his empire is over ‘ many islands and 
all Argos’, True, in the Catalogue Argos proper is taken away 
from him in order to provide for Diomedes; that may well be 
a mere mistake by the Catalogue-maker, as Dr. Leaf argues. 
But the word Argos itself seems to mean ‘a watered plain’, and 
in Homer it appears to have at least three meanings. It is the 
Argos of Thessaly, the Argos of the Peloponnese, and it is also 
a general name for Greece, especially when combined with 
Hellas—av’ Ἑλλάδα καὶ μέσον “Apyos. The point has been 
worked out by Cauer,? who thinks that Agamemnon was 
originally Thessalian. Outside Homer, however, the local habita- 


1 See Salomon Reinach, ‘ Sisyphe aux Enfers et quelques autres Damnés’» 
Cultes, Mythes, et Religions, vol. ii, pp. 159-205. 
2 Grundfragen®, pp. 284 ff. 


2760 P 


210 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC VIII 


tion of Agamemnon admits of little doubt. Heand Menelaus are, 
quite simply, joint kings of Sparta; the dual monarchy of Sparta 
exactly suits them. The Spartan Syagrus, when it was pro- 
posed that Sparta should yield up the leadership of Greece 
to Gelo of Syracuse, answered by a hexameter line, pre- 
sumably Homeric, though it does not occur in our texts: 
‘Bitterly would Pelops’ son Agamemnon groan’ if any but 
Spartans led the host (Hdt. vii. 159). His tomb was shown at 
Amyclae near Sparta among the other ancient Spartan kings. 
Pindar mentions that he died at Amyclae; Stesichorus and 
Simonides both refer to him simply as King of Sparta.) And, 
curiously enough, there is a passage in the Odyssey which points 
in the same direction. It is apparently a quotation from the 
Nostoi, or Homecomings, and describes Agamemnon’s voyage 
home in language that is unintelligible if he is bound for Mycenae 
or Argos or Corinth. When he ‘was nearing Cape Malea’ he 
was driven to sea by a storm; but why did he ever approach 
that dangerous cape if he only wanted to make Argos or My- 
cenae? If he was bound for Sparta it was his natural way. 
And the poet, though he has suppressed the mention of Sparta 
because the Odyssey in general put Agamemnon in Argos, seems 
to let out his secret when he makes Telemachus ask about 
Agamemnon’s death: ‘ Where was Menelaus? Why did he not 
help his brother?’ That certainly suggests that both kings are 
expected to be together. Probably, therefore, the Nostoi, like 
Pindar, Stesichorus, Simonides, and most of the non-Homeric 
tradition, had located the King of Kings of the Sea-People in 
the natural position for any supreme commander-in-chief of the 
Greek forces; they made him the senior of the two Spartan 
kings. Why the Attic-Homeric tradition removed him from 
there we can only conjecture, but it is not difficult to see possible 
reasons. ἡ 

Odysseus, though now prominent in the Z/ad, seems as a saga 
figure to have had little or nothing to do with Troy. In the 
Odyssey he is mostly a folk-lore hero with folk-lore adventures, 
though, of course, one can never be sure that these adventures 
have not been attached to a historic name. Some of them, at 
any rate, were actually told in the Middle Ages of Iskander Khan. 

1 Pind. Pyth. xi. 32, Nem. xi. 34: Schol. Eur. Or. 46. 


VII ODYSSEUS AND THE CALENDAR στὰ 


But myth has been at work also, and myth of a pronounced and 
curious kind. The point has not yet been noticed and needs 
a fairly full statement. It is a matter of the solar and lunar 
calendar. 

Time has been generally measured by the ‘eniautoi’, or 
repeated circuits, of the moon and the sun, i.e. by the month 
and the year. The object of a scientific calendar has always 
been to find a period in which the two circuits should correspond ; 
the New Moon should coincide with the winter solstice, and Sun 
and Moon begin their life together. (As a matter of fact, the 
two circuits are incommensurable, but that is a recent discovery.) 
The lunar month is twenty-nine days plus a fraction ; twelve 
months make 354 days plus some hours; a solar year equals 364 
days and a little over. Various cycles were tried with poor 
results. The simplest was a Trietéris, or double year; next 
a Pentetéris or period of four years, such as regulated the 
Olympian and Pythian Festivals. This period had fifty and forty- 
nine months alternately, and came fairly right every second time, 
in what was called the Ennaetéris. This ought to have come out 
at eight lunar years of 354 days each A/us three intercalary 
months of thirty days, that is 2,922 days; the same figure as is 
given by eight solar years of 3654 days; unfortunately the 
fractions were wrong, and there was an error of about a day and 
a half in eight years. 

Hence came the greatest effort of ancient calendar-making, 
Meton’s Eikosietéris, as it was called, or Grand Eniautos of Nine- 
teen Years. On the last day of the nineteenth year, which was 
also by Greek reckoning the first of the twentieth, the New Moon 
would coincide with the New Sun of the Winter Solstice; this 
was called the ‘ Meeting of Sun and Moon’ (Σύνοδος ᾿Ηλίου καὶ 
Sedjvns)—a thing which had not happened for nineteen full 
years before and would not happen again for another nineteen. 

Now when did Odysseus return to Penelope? The date is 
given with a precision most unusual in epic poetry. He returned 
to Ithaca ‘just at the rising of that brightest star which heralds 
the light of the Daughter of Dawn’ (ν 93). He rejoined his wife 
‘on the twentieth year’; i.e. he came as soon as the twentieth 
year came, as soon as the nineteenth was complete (ψ 102, 170; 
p 327, 8 175). He came at the New Moon, on the day which the 

Ee 


212 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC VIII 


Athenians called ‘ Old-and-New’, ‘when one month is waning 
and the next rising up’ (τ 307, € 162). This New Moon was 
also the day of the Apollo Feast, or Solstice festival of the Sun 
(v 156, d 258), and the time was winter.1 The Σύνοδος ᾽Οδυσσέως 
καὶ Πηνελόπης exactly coincides with the Σύνοδος of the Sun 
and Moon. 

There was an ancient Wise Man, Cleobilus, who showed his 
wisdom by making conundrums. One, recorded by Diogenes 
Laertius, runs thus: ‘ One father, twelve children; each of them 
with thirty children, partly black and partly white; and though 
immortal they all die.’ The answer is ‘ The Year ’, or rather the 
Eniautos, with its 360 day-and-night periods, which all pass. 
Can we be surprised to learn (ξ 20) that Odysseus had just 360 
boars, and that one of them died every day? Or can we any 
longer neglect the other solar characteristics that seem to cling 
about Odysseus: that the Sun is his rival and enemy; that he 
goes under the world in the West, visits the realm of the dead 
and comes up in the extreme East, ‘where the Daughter of 
Dawn has her dwellings and her dancing-floors and the Sun his 
uprising’ (μ 3) ; that he is brought back home asleep, in a magic 
boat, like the Sun in Mimnermus,? by Phaiakes (‘Dark Ones ?’) 
who do even the furthest journeys in twenty-four hours (7 326); 
that he lives inan island in the sea, ‘low-lying, apart from others, 
furthest of all towards the sunset’ (c 25 f.), a description that can- 
not be twisted so as to suit Ithaca; that he is a Far-darter of 
arrows; that his death comes to him out of the sea; and that, 
like most Year-kings, he is doomed to be slain by his son? 


To turn to another type, let us consider one of Achilles’ parti- 
cular enemies; to wit, Thersites. Every reader of the Jad 
remembers his brief and inglorious appearance in B, where he 
rails at Agamemnon with unseemly words, and is thrashed with 


1 € 457 νὺξ σκοτομήνιος, Odysseus freezing in his rags: p 25 there is frost; 
Odysseus cannot face the morning cold ; τ 64, 319 a great deal about piling 
up the fire; φόως ἔμεν ἠδὲ θέρεσθαι; cf. σ 332. Wilamowitz, H. U., p. 87; 
also 114. Cf. Carl Fries’s Studien zur Odyssee (Leipzig, 1910, 1911): also 
Seeck, Quellen, pp. 53 ff., 265 ff. On Ithaca cf. A. B. Cook, Zeus, i, p. 328. 

? The cattle of the Sun are in seven herds of fifty each, total 350. Hippo- 
crates divided the year into seven seasons (Galen, vol. xvii, I, p. 19; Kuhn, 
Comm. in Ep~idem.7), and Aristotle recognized the 350 as the days of the 
lunar year. See Eustathius, ad doc. 


VIII THERSITES 212 


a staff by Odysseus. He was the ugliest man in the Greek army, 
bald, and hump-backed, with one leg longer than the other. 
Let us remember that ; and then notice what Odysseus threatens 
to do with him. He will strip him naked and drive him away 
from the company of men (ἀγορῆθεν) with blows. Does it not 
remind one at once of the Zharmakos or scapegoat, the ugliest 
man in the community, who was made into a sin-offering and 
driven out from the city? But let us look further. 

The name Thersites has all the appearance of a fiction. It is 
derived from Zhersos, the Aeolic form of θάρσος, " courage’ or 
‘impudence’. And the poet of B evidently meant the name to 
have this latter meaning. It is rather a surprise to find that 
Thersites is really an independent saga-figure outside Homer 
with a life of his own and very distinguished relations. He was 
a son of Agrios, the savage Aetolian king, and first cousin once 
removed of the great Diomedes. His mother was Dia, a name 
which suggests a goddess. Returning to Homer, we find that 
Thersites was (B 220) ‘to two of the Greeks especially most 
hateful, Odysseus and Achilles’. Odysseus’ enmity needs no 
further explanation: Odysseus beat him. But why should 
Achilles be his enemy? Because Achilles, in the ordinary story, 
killed him. It happened in this way. When Achilles was 
fighting with Penthesilea the Amazon, and had given her a 
mortal wound, he was suddenly struck with remorse and love as 
he looked upon her dying face. Thersites saw this and grossly 
jeered, so Achilles very properly slew him, some say by a spear- 
thrust, others, by a heroic box on the ear. He was purified for 
this manslaughter by Odysseus. Diomedes, however, Thersites’ 
kinsman, took up a feud against Achilles in consequence." 

Another story is given in the old chronicle writer Pherekydes 
(fr. 82) and the poet Euphorion (fr. 131). Thersites took part in 
the hunt of the Calydonian boar, and, tor showing cowardice, 
was thrown by his cousin Meleager over a rock. (He is made to 


1 So the Azthiopis: followed by Chairemon’s tragedy, Achilles Thersito- 
ctonos. Hence Apollodorus, &c. Cf. Istros about the man called Pharmakos 
who was stoned ὑπὸ τῶν περὶ τὸν ᾿Αχιλλέα, Harpocrat. s.v. For the feud 
with Diomedes see Tzetz, Posthom. 199, 206: also Lycophr. 999, Quint. 
Smyrn. i. 767; Schol. Soph. Phil. 445, Dictys Cret. iv. 3. This late 
Latin book goes back to ancient sources. An earlier Greek version of Dictys 
has lately been discovered, dating probably from the second century A.D. 
Tebtunis Papyri. 


214 THE-RISE OF THE GREEK ἘΡΙ͂Ό Vill 


recover, much injured, in order to be slain again by Achilles.) 
Throwing from a rock, it may be remembered, was one of the 
regular modes of getting rid of a Dharmakos. 

The evidence so far points towards some connexion with 
a human sacrifice of the Dharmakos type, that is, a purgative 
sacrifice to cleanse the community ; also to some special con- 
nexion with Achilles. Can we take it a step further ? 

Professor Usener, the author of that stimulating book, 
Gotternamen, points out a more strange coincidence.1_ Thersites 
is found as a name elsewhere in Greece: and derivatives of the 
same stem are common, Thersias, Therson, and the like. Now 
in the Lacedaemonian® dialect this word would probably take 
the form Théritas, Onpiras: as Περσεφόνεια becomes in 
Laconian, IInpedévera. And Theéritas in Lacedaemon is a god 
of whom we know something. Pausanias saw his temple 
between Amyclae and Therapnae. Pausanias says that he was 
the same as Ares ; Hesychius, perhaps more accurately, says he 
was Enyalios—another war-god. He had a nurse—or mother— 
called Théro. 

Now the old sacrifice of the human scapegoat had in Sparta 
died down to a curious form, to which, however, there are many 
parallels elsewhere. It became an annual fight in a plane grove 
between two bodies of Ephébi, or Spartan youths. They fought 
with no weapons: only fists and feet. The plane grove was 
surrounded by a moat, and they threw the defeated, if they could 
manage it, into the water—another regular way of disposing of 
the Dharmakos.* And before this annual battle the Ephebi 
performed a sacrifice to Enyalios at a place called the Phoibeion, 
and a sacrifice to Achilles at his temple on the road to Arcadia 
(Paus. τ. 19.75 20. 2; 20. ὃ; battle οἱ Ee phebi, Τὴ. 8) Τὴ 
Enyalios is Théritas, as Hesychius tells us, we have here the 
ritual form of the old battle of Achilles and Thersites. What 
that battle in its primitive religious significance really was lies 


' Der Stoff des gr. Epos, in Sitzungsber. Wiener Akad., phil.-hist. Kl. 
1898, p. 47. 

@Tn strict Spartan Sypiras. Onpiras would be the Doricized ‘Achaian’ 
dialect of the Perioikoi, if Meister is right. See his Dover und Achder, 
pp. 24 ff. 

5. In the Thersites-Penthesilea story in Dictys, Diomedes has Penthesilea 
thrown, still living, into the water. 


VIII THERSITES: AIAS: DIOMEDES an 


beyond our scope. Usener thinks of the common annual rites of 
the slaying of Winter by Summer, or of one vegetation god 
by another. 


Different, again, is a hero like Telamonian Aias. He has no 
tribe, no home, no belongings. Only a shield which no one else 
can bear, and a father whose name is Telam6on, ‘ Shield-strap ’.! 
The lines connecting him with the island of Salamis are of the 
latest description. But he has another characteristic. Himself 
an immense man and fabulously strong, he constantly goes about 
with a companion, as brave as himself but small, The two 
together are called ‘ Aiante ’, ‘the two Aiases’, The name of the 
other varies. As the ας now stands, this companion is gener- 
ally Aias’s half-brother, by name Teukros: sometimes he is Aias 
the Less, a Locrian and son of Oileus.2, These persons require, 
of course, separate study. One of them at least, Teukros, seems 
to be a real saga-figure. But, like the more shadowy son of 
Oileus, he has been pressed into service as the Great Aias’s lesser 
twin. The Aiante are figures of folk-lore, and no doubt of 
primitive worship, parallel to the other sets of divine twins, the 
Tyndaridae, the Aphareidae, the Dioscuri, the Anake, the 
Leucopél6, the Aktori6ne Molione. It is worth noticing that 
Fick considers this twin-worship as characteristic of the Leleges: 
Salamis and Locris are both Lelegian centres. And the name 
Oileus is referred to the Lelegian language. 


Take again the case of Diomédés. He seems to be a tribal 
god or hero, connected with Aetolia and the Aetolian settlements 
on the north coast of the Peloponnese, though in the Catalogue 
he belongs to Argos and Epidaurus. Originally perhaps an 
Achaean, he has been affected by association with these wild 
Aetolian tribes, who came from Illyria and expelled the Achaeans, 


1 It has been suggested by P. Girard, Rev. des Etudes Grecgues, xviii. 
(1905), pp. 1-75, that Τελαμών (‘ Supporter’), as the father of Aias, is origin- 
ally not a shield-strap, but a door-post or pillar. This is good in point of 
religion, and would suit excellently with the conception of the Aiante as twins ; 
and an inscription (fifth cent.) from the Argive Heraeum uses τελαμών as = 
‘pillar’. It is also a Roman use—‘Telamones’, like ‘Caryatides’. See 
Herwerden, Lex. Supple¢. But to the writers of the //iad Aias is obviously 
a shield-hero. 

2 This suggestion was first made by Wackernagel, 1. U. 247". Cf. Eur. 


7. A. 192 κατεῖδον δὲ δύ᾽ Αἴαντε συνέδρω, τὸν Οἰλέως Τελαμῶνός τε γόνον. 


216 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC VII 


reducing Aetolia in historical times to savagery. His kinsman 
is ‘Agrios’, ‘Savage’. His father Tydeus would have been 
made immortal, owing to his many merits, had not his own tribal 
war-goddess, Athena, seen him eating an enemy’s head on the 
battle-field, ahd after that preferred to let him die. However 
that may be, we find in Greek tradition two ostensibly distinct 
persons bearing the name of Diomedes. There is this hero, 
mentioned in the //ad and Odyssey, the Epigoni and the 
Alkmaeonis, by birth an Argive, but a traveller to Aetolia, Troy, 
Italy, and Cyprus. He is a fierce and fiery young warrior, much 
associated with horses, but decidedly, if I may borrow a con- 
venient phrase from the language of the theatre, ‘ sympathetic’. 
That is to say, we are wont to be on his side, not on that of his 
enemies. But there is also another ‘ unsympathetic’ Diomedes, 
a ruffian and a savage ; a son of the Thracian war-god Ares, and 
King of Abdéra in Thrace. This Diomedes, who fed his fierce 
white horses with human flesh—an evident trace of human 
sacrifices—was suitably destroyed by Heracles, and his horses 
taken away. Now, as Eric Bethe has pointed out, these two 
heroes are probably in origin the same. As soon as you 
scratch the Argive Diomedes you find under his Hellenic surface 
the mark of the Thracian. In the most diverse localities we find 
him connected with the same horses and the same uncanny sacri- 
fices. In Cyprus to the far south-east he was worshipped with 
human victims. ΤῸ the far north-west the Venetians sacrificed to 
him white horses. In the /éad Diomedes has been cleared of 
his cannibal tendencies, and is left one of the most attractive 
figures in the poem, peculiarly brave and modest and wise in 
counsel. Yet incidentally we are constantly coming across his 
Thracian connexions. In K he slays the King of the Thracians, 
Rhésus, and carries off his famous white horses. In Εἰ also, I 
would suggest, he fights and routs the god of the Thracian 
aborigines, Ares: Ares flies to heaven, leaving no horses behind. 
But we find that, just before, Diomedes has fought Aeneas and 
his mother Aphrodite, and carried off Aeneas’s matchless horses. 
Aeneas is the son of Aphrodite, and Aphrodite is the goddess 
belonging to Ares. Originally, it would seem, a war-goddess 
and wife of the war-god, she has passed through the crucibles of 
Greek imagination, and emerges identified with a half-oriental 


VIII DIOMEDES 217 


love-goddess, a creature who has no business in battles, and is 
merely the paramour of the warrior god (see Schol. on Φ 416). 
Also her son in this case has Anchises for his father, not Ares. 
This probably is the result of mythological changes and poetic 
adaptations. One suspects that originally the hero conquered by 
Diomedes, and robbed of his horses, and immediately afterwards 
succoured by both Aphrodite and Ares, was a true son of Ares. 
Thus the story of Diomedes in E becomes an exact parallel to 
that of Diomedes the Thracian tyrant. For, in the processes of 
ancient mythology, to conquer a son of the Thracian Ares and 
despoil him of his matchless horses is exactly the same thing as 
to be a son of the Thracian Ares who is so conquered and 
despoiled. In the one story Diomedes has the passive part, in 
the other the active. It is like Dionysus the Bull-Slayer, and 
Dionysus the slain bull; Apollo the wolf,and Apollo the averter 
of wolves. 

So many and various are the elements of saga and tribal 
history which have taken shape in the heroes of the Jad. Of 
course we may admit freely the possibility that in any particular 
hero there may be traces of a real individual. The legends ot 
the Middle Ages are full of historical names. And the names 
Paris or Hector or even Agamemnon may have belonged 
originally to as definite a person as those of Charlemagne or 
‘Virgil the magician’, Attila or Dieterich of Berne. Professor 
Bury has remarked that the name and personality of a great 
foeman are apt to remain fixed in a nation’s memory. Had 
nineteenth-century England been still in the saga-making stage, 
she would certainly have mingled ‘ Boney’ with her ancestral 
demi-gods, But, if any of the persons are historical, we cannot 
identify them. And if the names are real, it does not follow that 
any part of the story really happened to the bearer of the parti- 
cular name. None of the mediaeval magician-stories happened 
to the real Vergil. 


IX 


THE BACKGROUND OF ΗΕ EID. 
THE “BIRTH OF paOMER? 


In the spring of 1923 a man brought to the experts of the 
Natural History Museum, South Kensington, a strange object 
which he wished identified. ‘It looks,’ he said, ‘ exactly like 
a petrified mammalian stomach’; and so it did, witha well- 
marked pylorus and other details. ‘You may be sure,’ said the 
expert, ‘that if it was a petrified mammalian stomach it would 
not look like one.’ It proved in fact to be a stone ginger-beer 
bottle which had collapsed before baking. 

I think that, in the search for historical facts among the poetical 
traditions of Greece, the warning of that expert should be borne 
in mind. Any real historical fact which was in the poetical 
tradition by 1000 B.C. would pretty certainly be transformed out 
of all likeness by the time it had passed through the hands of 
several hundred bards and formed a μεσ in innumerable 
different poems. Of course we often find that new discoveries 
‘confirm’ or at least ‘explain’ some epithet or phrase in the 
poems of which readers had taken no heed. The ‘ horse-taming 
Hector ’ and the Trojans ‘ mounters of swift horses’, the sack of 
Troy by Heracles ἕνεκ᾽ ἵππων Aaopédovros, receive new light 
when we learn from Professors Myres and Peake that Ilion II 
was very likely destroyed in the third millennium by an invasion 
of hordes from the steppes of Russia, who had just discovered 
that they could ride horses as well as drink the milk of mares. 
The horse-folk no doubt established themselves on the plain of 
Troy, and Ilion remained for long a special centre of the horse 
industry.’ It throws light on Hector’s war-cry 


Τρῶες καὶ Λύκιοι καὶ Δάρδανοι ἀγχιμαχηταΐί, 


1 See F. Sartiaux, Z7voze, 1915: Peake, Racial Elements concerned in the 
First Siege of Troy, 1916: Myres, Cambridge Ancient History (1923), p. 82: 
and especially Macurdy, 7voy and Paconia, which I have been privileged to 
see before publication, 


x HISTORY: SARPEDON AND TLEPOLEMUS — 219 


when we are taught by Professor Macurdy that the Dardans and 
other Thracian tribes in historical times seem to have origin- 
ated the dense infantry formation known as the Macedonian 
phalanx. 

In these cases history is preserved in the implications of an 
epithet ; it may equally be preserved in myths or proper names, 
without the knowledge of those who told or spoke them. What 
does not seem to occur is a plain statement about the act of 
an individual or tribe in which both the names and the facts are 
unchanged. So much we have seen in several of the examples 
taken in the last chapter. If we throw our net rather more 
boldly and look not for the direct record but the indirect 
evidence or implication, we shall have a better prospect of 
obtaining some tangible catch. As so often in these problems 
of early history, we may be able to divine not indeed the exact 
thing that did happen, but the sort of thing that must have 
happened. 

Consider the historical background of a case like the following. 
There is a fine passage of some seventy lines in Zzad E 627-98 
which narrates the slaying of Tlepolemus of Rhodes, a son of 
Heracles, by the Lycian Sarpédon. The passage interrupts the 
context. It is never referred to afterwards. The Heracleidae 
are nowhere else mentioned in Homer. And for divers reasons 
editors have marked the passage as a foreign insertion. But 
where does the insertion come from? The Heracleid of Rhodes 
has no place in the Trojan circle of legends. When one sees 
that his adversary is a Lycian, that is,a chieftain of the mainland 
just opposite Rhodes, where the Rhodians were constantly 
attempting to force a settlement, one can guess what may have 
happened. A local legend of battle between the Rhodian and 
the Lycian has been torn up from its natural context and 
inserted into the midst of the fighting about Troy. The song is 
a fragment of the history of Rhodes and Lycia.! 

1 The Sarpedon passages generally bear the marks of being in some sense 
foreign matter, either invented later or transferred from a different context. 
For instance, the Sarpedon who was buried in the famous grave-mound in 
Lycia must have been slain in Lycia, not in Troy. This was remarked in 
antiquity. The passage (Π 668 ff.) where Sarpedon’s body is carried from 
Troy to Lycia by Sleep and Death was considered ‘ spurious’ by Zenodotus, 


with whom Didymus agreed (Schol. ad /oc.), Eustathius also (p. 1069, 29) 
makes the very plausible surmise that Homer, knowing of the historical 


220 ΤῊΝ RISE OF THE, GREEK EPIC ΙΧ 


In searching for fragments of real history, like this, in the 
Homeric poems, it is probable that our best hunting-grounds 
will be in the little backwaters of narrative, where the plot 
interest is weakest and the details least important. That is to 
say, the poet will have left the history most unchanged in those 
places where he had the least motive to falsify it; and con- 
versely. In the case of Diomedes which we have just considered, 
for instance, the narrative is in the front plane of interest. 
Consequently the original story—if we were right in our sugges- 
tions—is hidden away under a mass of ornament and addition. 
Not only has the place of Diomedes’ battle with the war-god and 
his spouse been moved from Thrace to Troy, but the name of 
Aeneas has been substituted for some other name. When astory 
is mere background, and does not need to be made interesting, it 
is less tampered with. 

In the same book (43 ff.) we have the following passage :— 


Then Idomeneus despoiled Phaestus, son of the Maeo- 
nian, even of Borus who had come from deep-soiled Tarne. 
Him spear-famed Idomeneus stabbed with his long lance as 
he was about to mount upon his chariot, through his right 
shoulder. And down from the chariot he crashed and 
a horror of darkness laid hold on him. 


Idomeneus is the King of Cnossos in Crete, and Phaestus is 
otherwise only known to history as the next most famous town 


grave-mound in Lycia, invented these lines in order to combine it with his 
own story that Sarpedon was killed at Troy. It has long since been suggested, 
on other grounds, that influence was perhaps exerted on the /éiad by the 
princes of Lycia, who derived their descent from Sarpedon and Glaucus. 

Sarpedon, however, seems to have Thracian connexions as well as Lycian— 
even if the latter are not entirely an invention of the said princes, who may 
well have identified a native ancestor of their own with the famous Sarpedon. 
A promontory near Ainos in Thrace was called Sarpedon (Strabo, p. 331, fr. 
523; cf. p. 319), and Ainos is the home of Sarpedon in one of the Heracles 
legends. Ainos was an Aeolic settlement among Thracians ; hence Sarpedon 
is the blood-foe of Patroclus. His chosen comrade, Asteropaios (M 102 f.) 
is a Paeonian, son of the river Axios (Bethe, |. c.). His other comrade, 
Maris, is otherwise unknown, but suggests Maron. Glaucus himself, one may 
observe, is guest-friend of the Thracian Diomedes: but Glaucus is a figure 
with many ramifications. See Macurdy, l. c. 

One may notice, as a further mark of something unusual, that the Lycian 
genealogy given in Z 199 does not agree with the one ordinarily given, from 
Europa-Minos. And Diodorus says that Sarpedon fought on the side of 
Agamemnon against Troy! (v.79). Perhaps a mere slip. 


ΙΧ THE ‘ANDROKTASIAI’ 221 


in the same island. That is to say, Phaestus zs the town, or the 
eponymous hero of the town, and he is asserted to be a ‘son’ 
of the Maeonian or Lydian of the mainland. It reminds us 
of Zidon the firstborn of Canaan: apparently this was some 
Maeonian settlement at Phaestus. We may well have in this 
passage a record of a local battle or conquest in Crete, torn up 
from its surroundings and used by the poet to fill in some details 
of slaughter in a great battle before Troy. 

And what sort of a conquest was it? Idomeneus, if we inquire 
into his antecedents, appears pretty clearly as a northern invader 
of Crete. He is a son of Deucalion, which points to Thessaly. 
He is a great founder of cities in the north-west, like Diomedes 
and Odysseus. The men he fights fall into two groups:? 
Oinomaiis and Alkathoiis—who is in some legends one of the 
suitors slain by Oinomaiis, in others a son of Pelops the slayer of 
Oinomatis—these two take us to the Pelops-group of invaders in 
the Peloponnese. The others are what we may call Creto- 
Asiatic; Asius, from the Asian plain in Lydia, this Phaestus, son 
of the Maeonian from Lydia, and Othryoneus, a name derived 
from the Cretan word for a hill (ὄθρυς, see Fick-Bechtel, p. 421). 

Is there not history here, real history, however fragmentary 
and adrift from all its moorings? I think, following a hint of 
Bethe’s, that there is very likely a good deal of historical fact 
contained in certain passages which look at first sight like mere 
strings of meaningless names, I mean, the ἀνδροκτασίαι, or ‘ Man- 
slayings’, which constantly fill up the background of a Homeric 
battle picture. For instance, at the end of Diomedes’ great battle 
we have (Z 29 ff.) this passage :— 

Then Polypoites, firm in battle, slew Astyalus, and Odys- 
seus smote with his bronzen spear Pidutes of Percote, 
and Teucros godlike Aretaon. And Antilochus, son of 
Nestor, smote Ablerus with his shining spear, and Aga- 
memnon, king of men, slew Elatus. (He dwelt by the 
banks of fair-flowing Satnioeis, in lofty Pedasus.) And 


Eurypylus despoiled Melanthius. And Menelaus caught 
Adrastus alive. 


And so on. 
1 ] omit Aeneas and Deiphobus, They are obviously not inconsistent with 


the above grouping, but I hesitate to offer an explanation of their meaning in 
this context. Orsilochos, Idomeneus’ supposed son in ν 260, looks like a fiction, 


222 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC ΙΧ 


There may be fiction, and the emptiest kind of fiction, mixed 
up in this. And probably most of the history is at present 
untraceable. We will take one case in detail presently. But, 
first, let us reflect what constituted a man’s chief claim to public 
honour among these primitive northern tribes. The greatest 
thing, perhaps, was to be /P%oliporthos, a Sacker of Cities.! 
Short of that, a hero was chiefly known by the enemies whom 
he had slain. A curious remnant of this interest is to be found 
in Hyginus, the mythographer, chapters 112-115. ‘Quicum quo 
dimicarunt’, ‘Nobilem quem quis occidit’, ‘ Achivi qui quot 
occiderunt’, and so on. It is a well-known feature of heroic 
societies. Think of Sigurd Fafnirsbane, Hogni Sigurdsbane, 
and the rest. Think of the stories of Heracles, Achilles, Dio- 
medes. Ineach case the main groundwork is a list of the enemies 
whom the hero slew. In more civilized times we put on the tomb 
of a general a list of the victories which he won. In earlier 
times these victories were, or at least were represented as being, 
personal duels, man-to-man, and were commemorated, at any rate 
in times of migration, not by inscriptions on tombs, but by paeans 
or verses current among the tribe. One remembers how the 
Myrmidons in //Zad X march back to the ships singing their 
paean: ‘We have won us great glory, we have slain godlike 
Hector, to whom the Trojans in their city prayed as to a god.’ 

The emotion connected with these various victories would of 
course generally become dim with time, but the verses recording 
the bare facts would be remembered carefully by the bard of the 
tribe or group. Indeed their preservation would be the chief 
part of his business. And I strongly suspect that the lists of 
men slain by the various heroes in the //ad are, in their origin, 
these same quasi-tribal records, condensed into mere lists of 
names and, of course, transferred from their original contexts. 
In detail fiction may have entered in, and some names may be 
pure inventions, But in general, if we only interpret the Jan- 
guage rightly, I incline to believe that ‘ Odysseus’ did very likely 
slay ‘Pidutes of Percote’, and that some people claiming con- 
nexion with Agamemnon did very likely take the town of Pedasus 
in the valley of the Satnioeis. This last point, indeed, we actually 
know from history. . 

* Cf. Aesch. Ag. 472 and Cic. EP, ad Fam. x. 13. 2. 


IX LOCALIZATION OF HEROES 223 


But let us follow the story of the last victim in this ‘ Man- 
slaying’, Adrastus, who was taken by Menelaus alive and 
eventually slain by Agamemnon. He appears suddenly, with 
no name of father or country. But his. fate is told at length. 
His horses took fright, ran into a tamarisk bush, broke the pole — 
of his chariot, and flung him out upon his face. So Menelaus 
took him, but would have spared his life had not Agamemnon 
run up and himself stabbed Adrastus in the flank with his 
spear. 

Who is this Adrastus, and where was this battle really fought ? 
The name (‘No-escape’) is common in myth. It recurs in B 830. 
But we may notice that Pausanias saw a place near Thebes which 
was called Harma, Chariot; and when he inquired the origin of the 
name, he was informed that Adrastus, the celebrated King of Sik- 
yon, Leader of the Seven against Thebes, was there cast out of his 
chariot, which was entangled ina tamarisk bush, when he was flying 
from the battle at Thebes. This cannot be entirely a fabrication 
based on the /Zad. It is, in part at least, an independent tradi- 
tion, and we can make a shrewd guess at its source. Adrastus 
was the leader of the Argives in the 7eéazs, and his defeat and 
flight one of its crowning incidents. We have found the Jad 
using the Zebazs before. (See p. 181 f.) And again, when 
Agamemnon’s kingdom is described in the Catalogue (B 572) 
it includes ‘ Sikyon, where aforetime Adrastus was king’. That 
is, this fatherless and floating Adrastus seems—though the 
reciters of the Ziad as a rule did not suspect it—to have been 
originally the great Adrastus of the Theban War. And what of 
his slaying by Agamemnon? Does it represent some misty 
tradition of a real battle? One would think so; but there is 
still the likelihood that it may be a mere fiction. In any case, if 
there is any real history behind it, that history did not take place 
at Troy. 


It seems quite possible that few of these battles of the /Zad 
did. A line of research indicated by- Eric Bethe in a brilliant 
essay on Die Trojanischen Sagenkrerse tends to establish clearly 
what many of us had suspected before, that much of the fighting 
which Homer locates at Troy, in Asia Minor, on the south- 
eastern shore of the Hellespont, is really a reminiscence of old 


224 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC IX 


mainland wars, whose legendary centre, I would suggest, was 
once not Troy but Thebes. Dr. Bethe’s method is this. 
Those heroes who have a real existence in the tradition, apart 
from the /Zad, can in many cases be traced to their diverse 
homes or settlements by three trains of evidence: first, their 
graves and places of worship; secondly, their blood-feuds, for a 
tribe’s blood-feud is usually against a close neighbour; and 
thirdly, their wives, kinsmen, and the like. 

Take the case of Achilles. It is quite clear. Achilles is 
firmly located in Phthia, in the country between Thessaly and 
Locris, on the Spercheios river. All his kindred are about 
him. The temple of Thetis, his mother, is close to Pharsalos. 
His father Peleus is associated with Mt. Pelion. His sister was 
married to the river Spercheios. And in the same neighbour- 
hood we find his blood-foes. Two heroes, celebrated in other 
contexts, but in the 7/zad reduced to mere names for filling up 
an ‘androktasia’,! Dryops and Deucalion, belong to this region. 
So does his better-known enemy Cycnus, the Swan-hero. More 
than that, there is quoted from the third-century historian Istros 
a statement which puzzles Plutarch and directly conflicts with 
all the Homeric tradition, that Alexandros or Paris was slain 
by Achilles and Patroclus upon the banks of the Spercheios. 

In Homer, of course, Alexandros is a Trojan prince who 
perhaps never saw the Spercheios in his life, and he is not killed 
by Achilles, but on the contrary kills him some time after 
Patroclus is dead. It is startling to find him fighting on the Locrian 
border. Yet an inquiry into the origin of Alexandros-Paris gives 
him also a home in the same region as his enemy, Achilles. 
His sister, who like himself has a double name, Alexandra 
or Cassandra, was worshipped in historical times in Locris. 
(The Locrians had some strange connexion with Ilion. As 
late as the fourth century B.C. they supplied periodically two 
highly zadoo priestesses to the temple there. The natives always 
tried to prevent them coming in, and once killed one of them.’) 
The heroes with whom Paris fights in the Ziad, especially those 
who have no importance in the story, and are therefore not 
inserted for a fictional purpose, are almost all Thessalians, such 


* ¥ 455, 478. 
* Timaeus ap. Schol. Lycophr. 1155, 1159: Aeneas Tacticus 31. 24. 


IX ANDROMACHE: HECTOR 225 


as Machaon, Eurypylos, Menesthios.!_ He is killed at last by the 
Malian Philoctetes. 

Andromache, the wife of Hector, comes from Thebé, a town 
which is described as Ὑποπλακίη, or in words which explain 
that epithet, ‘beneath wooded Placos’. No one in antiquity 
knew what or where Placos was, though it was presumed to 
be a mountain. Was it not the mountain above that Thébé 
which lies between Pharsalus and Mt. Pelion, at the northern 
boundary of Achilles’ realm? Andromache in one passage of 
the Ziad (Z 397 ff.) is made a Cilician; but in the saga generally 
she is connected not with any place in Asia, but with the north 
and north-west of Greece. She is the mother of Molossus, the 
eponymous hero of a tribe in Epirus called Molossi. In another 
legend she is the mother of Kestrinos, eponymous hero of the 
Epirot territory Kestriné. This seems to be the real tradition. 
It is then harmonized with the Troy-poems by making some one 
bring the Trojan queen back to Greece after the capture of her 
city. In one legend it is Neoptolemus, the son of Achilles, who 
so brings her. In another it is Helenus, her brother-in-law. 

And what of Hector himself, the great ‘City-holder’? Did he 
always in legend hold the same city?) As Diimmler has observed, 
he was worshipped as a hero in Boeotian Thebes. And if we 
examine the list of people whom he kills or fights in the //ad, 
their cults and graves and legends crowd round the neighbour- | 
hood of Boeotia. Leitos (P 601) had a tomb in Plataea: Oresbios 
(E 707) lived in Hylé: Arkesilaos (O 329) was buried in 
Lebadeia. As for Hector’s comrade, Melanippos (O 547-83), 
we know that a hero Melanippos was, like Hector himself, 
worshipped in Thebes. Hector was a great ‘slayer of men’, 
and his victims in the: //ad make a sort of road from Thebes 
upward to the bounds of Achilles’ region, Dr. Bethe mentions 
Schedios the Phocian, whose tomb Strabo saw at Daphnus on 
the Euboean Gulf (O 515, and again P 306: Strabo, ix. 425); 
Autonoos, worshipped as a hero at Delphi (A 301); Orestes, 
connected in saga with Phocis (Εἰ 705) ; Tréchos the Aetolian, 
who must be the eponymous hero of Tréchis (E 706). Tréchis 
lies at the mouth of the Spercheios on the borders of the realm 


1 Cf. A 506; A 580, B 736; H 9. 
2760 Q 


226 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC IX 


of Achilles. Patroclus, Hector’s greatest victim, belongs to the 
heart of that country. Further north he slew Helenos, son of 
Oindps (E 707), Epeigeus from the town of Boudeion (II 571), 
and in some legends also Protesilaos. The road has led us even 
beyond the blood-foe Achilles, up to Thébé, the city of Hector’s 
wife Andromache. It is strange. It looks as if forgotten 
remnants of old Boeotian saga, or even epos, omitted from 
the canonical 7hedsazs, which concentrated on the war of The 
Seven, were used for building up the plot of the ‘ poetry about 
Troy’. 

Another group of closely united enemies—in these connexions 
neighbour and enemy are almost interchangeable terms—is to be 
found in Lacedaemon. If the above was the Achilles-Hector- 
Alexandros group, this is the Helen group. It consists of Helen, 
Agamemnon, Menelaus, Alexandros the ravisher of Helen, and 
Deiphobus her third husband. Alexandros, it will be seen, 
appears in both groups.! Helen of course lived in Sparta. Her 
husband Menelaus had a grave and a temple at Therapnae: and 
at the same place, according to the statement of a late though 
well-informed authority,? both Alexandros and Deiphobus 
received divine honours. Perhaps in this statement Therapnae 
is a mistake for Amyclae, which suits the geography slightly 
better. Also Amyclae is the home of a Deiphobus in the 
Heracles legend (Apollod. ii. 6. 2; Diod. iv. 31; Jahn, Bz/der- 
chronik, p. 70): and in Amyclae also lay the sanctuary of 
Alexandros’s sister Alexandra-Cassandra, and beside it her tomb, 
together with that of Agamemnon. 

I will not pursue the subject further. One may well be surprised 
at the tenacity with which these ancient local worships held their 
ground through almost the whole lifetime of Greece as a nation. 
The tribes which instituted them, and through which alone they 
had reality, had long since passed away both from those particular 
neighbourhoods and from the face of the earth. They were 
often in flat contradiction with that other stream of history 
popularized and made canonical by the Ziad and Odyssey. At 


* Cf. Agamemnon, of whom the same is true: both Agamemnon and 
Alexander are famous as ‘ Lords of Ships’. 


* The dialogue ‘Theophrastus’ on the immortality of the Soul, by Aeneas 


of Gaza (fifth century 4.D.), cited in 5. Wide, Lakonische Kulte, p. 351; 
Bethe, I. c., p. 16. 


ΙΧ GREEK AND NORTHERN EPIC 227 


a time when all educated people throughout Greece knew from 
their childhood the Helen of poetry, the fairest of mortal women, 
the gentle adulteress whose sin is almost forgiven because of her 
graciousness, old peasants and pietists continued to worship her 
rude and ugly idol at Sparta, praying for happy marriage or for 
the health of sick children. Sometimes the two streams of 
legend, that of the //zad and that of the local worship, ran on 
without mingling ; more often, of course, ways were invented for 
harmonizing the two. That is why, for instance, Cassandra is 
brought from Troy by Agamemnon, to be buried beside him at 
Therapnae; why a Locrian hero is made to commit a sin against 
Cassandra, to be expiated ever afterwards by the Locrians 
worshipping at her sanctuary. 


There is perhaps one point here which calls for special 
reflection. It seems to our minds unnatural that such vital 
poems should be written about mere creatures of the imagination, 
like gods and tribal daemons. And Chadwick has convincingly 
shown that a ‘heroic age’ is an age of great doings and great 
individuals. In the German and Scandinavian legends many of 
the heroes bear real historical names and represent real persons. 
Why should this not be the case in Greek legend also? 

I think the cause of the difference lies in the vastly greater 
lapse of time during which the Greek epic grew. The native 
epic tradition in Northern Europe was checked and overruled 
from very early times by the Latin cultural tradition. The 
Latin chronicles kept some guard over history. The rich and 
accomplished Latin poetry killed out, at least among the literary 
classes, any effective interest in the struggling vernacular poetry. 
The Church checked the Pagan imagination. But the Greek 
poetic tradition had no elder brother to snub it, no foreign 
schoolmaster to run a blue pencil through its errors and drive its 
imagination underground. It grew in its own soil, luxuriating 
in invention and building up on its own native lines an ever 
statelier beauty. 

The study of Greek mythology shows beyond serious question 
the enormous part played by village ritual and custom in form- 
ing the great legends. The aboriginal peasants of Greece seem 
to have sung and danced about their field-magic, their fertility 

Q 2 


228 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC IX 


cycles, and their Year-Daemons, from the earliest antiquity. 
Then came the Migrations with their stirring events, their strong- 
armed magnificent adventurers. The focus of interest was 
changed. Instead of thinking of the crops and the customs, 
people talked of the last great deed of some famous coxdottere, 
the last great downfall of a Minoan city or castle. The epic 
lays that then broke into being were doubtless full of these 
historical persons and events. And if fate had arrested their 
development about the year 1000 B.C., we might well have had 
poems as historical as—say—the French epics concerned with 
Charlemagne. Dr. Chadwick’s four stages of Heroic Poetry! 
do not happen to fit the course of Greek literature; but, roughly 
speaking, Homer seems to represent what Stage II would 
have grown into, if it had had centuries of free life, and had 
been perfected neither at Kings’ Courts nor at village inns, 
but at great Pan-European Festivals, like the Panégyreis of 
Greece. 

The epic developed, but the individuals of the Heroic Age 
lost their definite settings. The old myths and ritual stories 
sprang up again and overgrew them. Their real names perhaps 
remain in fair number; but their deeds are the deeds of mythical 
beings and they themselves indistinguishable from so many 
creatures of mythology or fancy. 

Even in historical times gods and spirits were present to the 
minds of the Greek to a degree that we can hardly realize. 
When they defeated the Persians in the full light of history, 
their general’s comment was: ‘It is not we who have done this, 
but the gods and the heroes’ (Hdt. viii. 109). That is not 
perfunctory piety. It is not even the mark of a specially 
reverent and beautiful humility; for the speaker was Themistocles, 
a hard-bitten and scheming man. It is a remnant of the feeling 
which permeates our record of the warfare of the Heroic Age, 
and which is found still among primitive peoples. Think how it 
pervades the Old Testament. Think of the many stories in books 
-of anthropology telling how a savage who has succeeded or 

1 Heroic Age, p.94: ‘I. Court poems of the Heroic Age itself. II. Epic 
and narrative poems based on these. III. The popular poetry of the eighth 
and following centuries. IV. The German poems of the twelfth and following 


centuries, when heroic subjects had again come into favour with the higher 
classes.’ 


IX THE HEROES OF EPIC POEMS 229 


failed in catching his prey explains that his #zaza, or even his 
totem, has been on that particular occasion strong or weak. 
There is an early inscription extant in which the people of 
Selintis celebrate a successful battle, in which presumably 
various individuals had in the normal ways distinguished them- 
selves. We moderns would have mentioned their names. But 
the inscription of the Selinuntians runs thus: ‘Thanks to the 
following gods we of Selintis have conquered: Zeus Nikator, 
Phobos, Heracles, Apollo, Poseidon, the Tyndaridae, Athena, 
Malophoros, Pasikrateia, and the others, but especially thanks to 
Zeus’ (1. G. A. 515). We know how the gods Castor and 
Polydeucés fought for Rome at the battle of Lake Regillus, and 
for the Locrians against Croton. We know how the Greeks 
before the battle of Salamis sent a ship to Aegina to fetch ‘ Aias 
and Telamon and the other Aeacidae’, including Peleus and 
Achilles, to lead them against the Persians (Hdt. viii. 64). They 
are doubtless included, if not specially meant, in Themistocles’ 
words, attributing the victory to ‘the gods and heroes’, The 
same Aeacidae had been lent by Aegina to Thebes on a previous 
occasion, about which the less said the better. For the Thebans 
were defeated, Aeacidae and all (Hdt. v. 80), and told the 
Aeginetans that next time they would prefer a regiment of men. 
Now, suppose the battle of Salamis had been fought, not in the 
full light of Greek history, but in the misty dawn of the Epos, 
what sort of a story should we have had? Would it have been 
all about Themistocles and Eurybiades and the Corinthians? I 
suspect it would have been Aias and Telamon and Peleus and 
Achilles who defeated Xerxes. That, at least, is the way 
in which many early Greek traditions seem to have been 
recorded. 

It remains to consider another point. Why do the Homeric 
battles all refer not to any warfare that was going on at the time 
of their composition, but to warfare of forgotten people under 
forgotten conditions in the past? The fact is certain. Even if 
the analysis made in this essay be all wrong, there will remain 
just the same problem. For the poems were certainly for many 
centuries in the hands of Ionian and Attic bards, who are shown 
by all the evidence to have largely added to them. Yet, with all 
their additions, they never brought in any celebration of their 


230 THE’ RISE ΘΕ THE GREEK (EPIC IX 


own immediate present. There is no mention of the Asiatic 
colonies, of the great Ionian cities, of the later groupings of 
tribes. The few exceptions to this rule are mere accidents. 
There is all through the poems a distinct refusal to cheapen epic 
poetry by the celebration of contemporary things. If men 
wanted to celebrate the present they did so in other forms of 
literature. 

What shall one say of this? Merely that there is no cause for 
surprise. It seems to be the normal instinct of a poet, at least of 
an epic poet. The earliest version of the Soug of Roland which 
We possess was written by an Anglo-Norman scribe some thirty 
years after the conquest of England. If the Normans of that age 
wanted an epic sung to them, surely a good subject lay ready to 
hand. Yet asa matter of fact their great epicis all about Roland, 
a not very important chieftain dead three hundred years before, 
not about William the Conqueror. The fugitive Britons of 
Wales made no epic to tell of their conquest by the Saxons; 
they turned to a dim-shining Arthur belonging to the vaguest 
past. Neither did the Saxons who were conquering them make 
epics about that conquest. They sang how at some time 
long past a legendary and mythical Beowulf had conquered 
a monstrous Grendel and Grendel’s mother and a dragon. 

Yet this past of which epic poets make their songs, what 
exactly is it? It is not the plain historical past. It is the past 
transformed into something ideal, something that shall be more 
inspiring or more significant. In the case of the //ad the old 
traditional fighting is all concentrated into one great war, and 
that a war for the possession of the very land which the pro- 
fessed descendants of Agamemnon were fighting for in historical 
times. 

1. It is difficult to sum up this scattered evidence, but we seem 
to find in the historical background of the poems the following 
elements. There were extant the ruins of a great fortified 
stronghold at Ilion in the Troad, at least twice destroyed, and a 
tradition of the moving wars of those peoples from the North 
who troubled and eventually destroyed Aegean civilization in the 
third and second millennia B.c. As to dates, the Troad seems 
to have been invaded by the horse-folk about 2300 B.C., but we 
hear most about those ‘Peoples of the Sea’ and others who 


IX THE BACKGROUND 221 


raided as far as Egypt between 1300 and 1150: Akhaiuasha, 
Danauna, Luka, Dardenni, T’akarai and the like.’ It follows 
that this fighting did not all take place at Troy. And it 
seems almost certain that, as the fame of the Trojan War grew 
greater, alien heroes were drawn into it, as Atli and Theodoric 
were drawn into the Vzde/ungented. 

2. The chief fighters in this warfare, like Menelaus, Odysseus, 
Agamemnon, bear names apparently Greek, though markedly 
different in formation from the Greek names of historical times ; 
others bear regular Greek names, but of types that in later ages 
occur chiefly in Macedon, Thrace, and Epirus.? It seems likely 
enough, after Dr. Chadwick’s work on the subject, that under 
some of these names lie the names of real Heroic Age adven- 
turers, while others belonged originally to divine or mythical 
beings. This isa question only to be solved by external evidence, 
and no external evidence is to be had, but it seems clear that 
even where these names once belonged to real men, their sagas 
had by the sixth century been covered over by a vast growth of 
myth and even of folk-lore, to say nothing of pure fiction. 

3. The poet is always conscious of a great difference between 
his own age and that of the heroes, and maintains with few 
lapses a remarkably consistent convention of what the Heroic 
Age was like. We must conclude that there was a fairly con- 
tinuous tradition from the Heroic Age downward, kept alive no 
doubt in part by the ruins of Mycenaean castles, by ancient gems 
and jewels such as are still discovered, by the ancient armour and 
other relics which we know to have been preserved in temples, 
but also by sagas and lays. At any rate it is certain that in the 
poems as recited in the fourth century this heroic convention is 
preserved and consciously protected. Any lapse from it is 
noticed in the Alexandrian scholia. Yet the Heroic Age must 
have been over by about 1100 B.C. 

4. It must always be remembered that the 7/ad and Odyssey 
are not poetic chronicles ; they are elaborate and highly wrought 


1 Cf, ᾿Αχαιβοί, Δαναοί, Λύκιοι, Δάρδανοι, Tevxpot. The terminations -sha and 
-na seem to be the same as occur in Lycian. Hall, Oldest Civilization, 
pp. 178 ff. Cyprus was raided by Lukki about 1400 B.C. For other records of 
these tribes see Breasted, Ancient Records, ili, pp. 136, 157: Cowley, 
Hittites (1920), pp. 13-23. 

2 See Bury in Quarterly Review, July 1922; also Macurdy, l. c. 


232 THE RISE OF THE’ GREEK EPIC IX 


works of fiction using traditional material. The material is 
often very old, the finished poem in its present state comparatively 
late. For example, the ram-adventure of Odysseus in Odyssey t 
is depicted on an early Cretan gem and must have been current 
about 1500 B.C.; whereas the reunion of Odysseus and Penelope 
after Meton’s ez£oszefer7s implies an astronomical discovery which 
is attributed to the year 430 B.C. or thereabouts. (See p. 211.) 

5. Into this legendary past were projected the wars of the 
Greeks who in historical times established themselves in the 
region called Aecolis, just south of Troy, and perhaps a real 
historical meeting of hosts from the Peloponnese with hosts from 
South Thessaly—of Agamemnon with Achilles; while at a 
later time again the whole tradition was reinspired by the great 
war of all Hellas against Persia and the East, and knit up with 
the Spartan ritual myth of the beloved Helen, for ever ravished 
and rewon. 

If we consider this fifth observation more closely, we ought to 
receive some light upon that question which so vexed antiquity, 
the birthplace of Homer. [Ilion is a fixed and known place; the 
Aeolian tribes also belong on the whole to a definite area. They 
were driven from South Thessaly across the North Aegean by a 
direct bridge of islands: Ikos, Skyros, Lesbos—and there was the 
south-west extremity of the Troad immediately in front. The 
meeting of Achilles and Agamemnon, if we could be sure what it 
meant, would be more conclusive still. Achilles, though he had 
worship in the Peloponnese, is mostly Thessalian: Agamemnon, 
though he had Thessalian connexions, is mostly Peloponnesian : 
and if we look for some great traditional meeting-place for the 
people of Agamemnon from the south, and the people of Achilles 
from Thessaly, the first place to suggest itself is the island of 
Lesbos. It wasalso about a‘ girl of Brisa’ in Lesbos that the chiefs 
quarrelled. The fourth point is hardly needed, it points to the 
same result. If the ravishment of Helen now takes a new 
direction towards the Troad, that fits in with a movement of Helen’s 
Peloponnesian worshippers towards the same place. The time 
and place which originally provided the main strands of the frame- 
work of the Troy-saga are fairly clear. The time is the Aeolian 
migration, the place is Lesbos or some early settlement on the 
shore of Asia. If we take Homer as the author of the Troy-epic 


IX THE BIRTHPLACE OF HOMER 233 


the area known as Aeolis is his first birthplace. This conclusion is 
exactly borne out by the ancient Lives of Homer, which, however 
apocryphal and romantic, represent at least a tradition. 

Further, our historical argument fits with the argument from 
language. True, the Ziad and Odyssey, as given in all our 
MSS., appear in a quasi-Ionic dialect. But it is beyond ques- 
tion that the dialect has been in some way changed. The epos 
has been worked over into its present Ionic from some other 
speech. What that speech exactly was is open to dispute.! 

Professor Fick, in his epoch-making editions of the two poems, 
argued boldly that it was ordinary Lesbian Aeolic, and that both 
poems had been definitely translated into Ionic by the rhapsode 
Kynaithos of Chios about the year 540 B.C. He showed that 
the poems were full of ‘ Aeolic’ forms in the midst of the Ionic, 
and these Aeolic forms had the peculiarity, nearly always, of 
being metrically different from the corresponding Ionic forms. 
That is: the poems for the most part were simply wrought over 
into Ionic word for word, but when the proper Ionic word did 
not scan, the older Aeolic form was left. The practice iscommon, 
one may almost say regular, in traditional books. Many English 
ballads occur in northern and southern forms, many old French 
poems in French of Paris, Norman-French, and Picard. And 
this general conception of an ‘ Aeolic’ stage of the Homeric 
poems has been accepted by almost all advanced critics. 

Yet it needs an important correction. Fick’s full theory, with 
Kynaithos and the sixth century included, has had few supporters. 
And if we abandon that definite date and person, the linguistic 
arguments rather change their character. For the two most 
characteristic distinctions of the Ionian speech, the loss of w- 
sounds and the turning of ἃ into ἡ, can be shown to have occurred 
later, and perhaps considerably later, than the first foundations 
of the cities in Asia Minor, So that the wand the long ὦ sounds 
of Homer were as much the property of Proto-Ionic, if we may 
use the term, as of Aeolic. The language of Homer—omitting 
for the moment the numerous false forms and modernisms of our 
present texts—is markedly based upon an older stage of the 


1 To the ancients it was chiefly a question of pronunciation: cf. τὴν ποίησιν 
ἀναγιγνώσκεσθαι ἀξιοῖ Ζώπυρος ὁ Μάγνης Αἰολίδι διαλέκτῳ" τὸ δὲ ἀυτὸ καὶ Δικαίαρχος 


(Osann, Anecd, Rom. 5). 


234 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC ΙΧ 


Greek language than either the Ionic of Herodotus or the Lesbian 
of Sappho.! This is illustrated, among other facts, by the 
curious affinities between the Epic dialect and two dialects utterly 
out of the range of epic influence, Arcadian and Cyprian.” 

What can there be in common between Arcadia, the central 
highlands of the Peloponnese, and Cyprus, the remote Greek 
island in the gates of the Semite? Nothing, one would say, but 
their isolation. They were both so cut off from the normal 
currents of progressive Greek civilization that they retained more 
than other communities of their original speech, as the French in 
Canada retain peculiar elements of the language of Louis XIV. 
And consequently they show curious agreements with Homer, 
whose dialect, for reasons easily intelligible, clung to the oldest 
form of speech that was capable of being comfortably understood. 
It is not, therefore, accurate to say szmfliciter that Homer has 
been translated from Aeolic into Ionic, if by Aeolic we mean 
sixth-century Lesbian, or the group of which Lesbian is the type, 
Lesbian-Thessalian-Boeotian, One has to allow for the existence 
of an old poetic dialect, ancestral both to the Aeolic of Lesbos 
and to the Ionic of the ‘ mixed multitudes’, the language of old 
Greece, ‘ before the sons of the Achaioi came’. 

There is certainly a strong Lesbian element in Homer, as was 
recognized in antiquity. There are certain forms of words which 
are definitely Lesbian, and not primitive, dialectical peculiarities 
which first originated in the Lesbian-Aeolic dialects; falsely 
formed datives in -εσσι, falsely formed perfect participles in 
-κων, -KovTos, a preference for κεν Over ἄν, and various forms 
like ἄλλυδις, νύμφα, &c. The Lesbian form dypéw is generally 
altered to aipéw, but in the imperative, where it was not recog- 
nized, it is left. Still, the main texture of the earlier Homeric 
language is not Lesbian-Aecolic, but some earlier and more widely 
diffused speech. What does this mean in history? 

It is just what we should have expected from our analysis 
of the raw material of the poems. It is the speech of these 
immensely old tribal or quasi-tribal traditions which, as we have 
seen, form the ultimate historical content of the Z/zad. They 


1 See the valuable Appendix to Monro’s edition of Odyssey xili-xxiv, 
pp. 455-88. He scems to me to underrate the Aeolic element. : 
2 Thumb counts Cyprian as ‘Achaean’, meaning thereby ‘ pre-Dorian’. 


᾿ 


IX THE SECOND BIRTH OF HOMER 235 


come in part from Southern Greece, but mostly from the 
country traversed by various groups of wandering ‘ Northmen 
in the Heroic’ Age, from the Vardar and Struma valleys, from 
Thrace and Macedon and Thessaly. What took place in Aeolia 
or Lesbos was the first collecting of them into a Trojan setting. 
It is interesting in this connexion to notice that the scenery of 
the similes is apt to be Thessalian and not Asiatic: that the 
Muses come from Olympus and the vale of Pieria in Thessaly, 
and the gods, wherever they may wander, still keep their 
‘ Olympian houses’.1 

And there is this to observe: that however loosely the various 
masses of legend floated, there was in very early times some 
feeling that they formed a whole, or at least a series of wholes. 
There was some conception of a consecutive saga or history. 
Each bard is understood to begin his lay—évOev ἑλών, Or τῶν 
ἁμόθεν ye—at some particular point in the great story.” There 
must have been some great deed or experience in common, some 
impulse to history writing, some breaking down of family and 
tribal barriers. That experience, it seems clear, must have been 
the Heroic Age. 

The next birth of Homer was certainly in Ionia. We have 
seen that the colonists of Lesbos had some pretensions to unity 
of race. The place from which the exodus came was so close. 
The bridge from Mt. Pelion to Aeolis, by Skyros and Lesbos, is 
so straight and complete. There may also have been some 
unity of race in the extreme south of Asia Minor, where the 
group called itself ‘Doris’. The Dorian tribes were at any rate 


1 The Mysian Olympus may have been regarded locally as the seat of the 
gods: but the ‘ Homeric’ gods evidently dwell in the Thessalian Olympus. 
The ‘Twelve Gods’ seem to have been a Thessalian institution ; the first 
altar to them was built by Deucalion (Schol. ap. Rhod. 111. 1085. Cf. ii. 532 
with Schol.), 

2 One would like to know when these lays became (1) continuously metrical 
and (2) hexametric. The hexameter as it stands in Homer has been thought . 
to show traces of having originated in two dactylic trimeters with anacrusis, 
what the Greek metrists call Paroimiacs (see Van Leeuwen, Lchiridion, 
pp. 1-24), and it is curious that the extant Aeolic poets hardly use the 
hexameter at all. (Sappho 93, 94, 95, are instances.) The Stesichorean 
metre, sets of dactylic trimeters mixed with trochaic (or iambic) metra 
—Uu—Uv——, —v—=), is perhaps older than the finished hexameter. If 
there were evidence to show that the hexameter was specifically Ionic, some 
clear conclusions could be drawn. (‘There is. It was the metre of the 
Paean, and was invented by Olen of Lycia, i.e. at Delos.’—J.A. K. T.) 


236 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC ΙΧ 


the leaders of their communities. But all along the great stretch 
of coast between these two little groups there seems to have been 
no definite unity or common descent. They may have inherited 
a good deal from Crete,! but every city wall contained a 
σύμμεικτον πλῆθος, a‘ mixed multitude’, They could merely be 
classed together as ‘ Iawones ’, Sons of Javan, and even that name 
is given them by foreigners. 

It looks as if these ancestors of the Ionians had in the extreme 
stress of their migrations lost hold upon their earlier tradi- 
tions. At any rate, it was only in later times, and only by 
turning to their northern neighbours, that the Ionians obtained, 
or recovered, their heritage in the Epos. It came to them then 
as part of a regular process. For it is just these central settle- 
ments, these most tribeless and fugitive of the Sons of Javan, 
that built up the greatest achievements of Greek civilization 
before the rise of Athens, In historical times the Ionian Greek 
is always prevailing over the Aeolian, ousting him, outstripping 
him, annexing his cities and his possessions. The Ionian poet 
Mimnermus, early in the seventh century, narrates how a party 
of Ionians from Colophon and Pylos set forth and captured 
Aeolian Smyrna.2_ The same thing can be shown to have 
happened in Chios, though there the memory of the conflict 
was forgotten, and the island counts as simply Ionian. And 
these cases may be taken as typical. The Aeolic settlements 
belong to an earlier, ruder, and more chivalric stage of culture, 
and were superseded by the higher intelligence and practical 
adaptability of the Ionians. And besides their walled cities, the 
Aeolians were robbed also of their Homer. 

How did this process take place?) There may conceivably at 
some time have been a definite authoritative change of dialect ; 
but it seems more likely that the Epic dialect gradually changed 

1 See Prof. Burnet’s monograph Who were the [onians ? 

? Mimn. 9. He makes no apology; but we have beside his verses a more 
defensive Ionian account of the affair, explaining that they were not the 
aggressors. Strabo, xiv. 634. The town first belonged to the Leleges; they 
were driven out by ‘Smyrnaeans’ from Ionic Ephesus: they were expelled 
by Aeolians, but returned with help from Ionic Colophon, and ‘regained their 
own land’. The story illustrates first the tendency of Ionia to outstrip and 
thrust aside Aeolis ; and secondly, the existence of a certain feeling of shame 
in thus expelling a city of brother Greeks. To drive out Leleges was of 


course fair hunting. Cf. Wilamowitz, Panionton, in Sitzungsber. Berlin. 
Akad. 1906, iii. 


IX THE SECOND BIRTH OF HOMER 237 


as the spoken language changed. As more and more Greek 
cities, and those the richer and larger ones, began to drop the 
letter Vau and to pronounce Eta instead of long Alpha, the 
bards who recited Homer in those cities naturally changed their 
pronunciation too. Such a change would be as unconscious as 
the modern English change in the pronunciation of Zea or room. 
But there was another and a decisive motive of change. We 
have seen already that, though a short lay may be recited round 
a camp fire or a banquet board, a poem at all approaching the 
length of the Z/zad or Odyssey can only be recited on some great 
public occasion, lasting over several days, and consequently can 
only have been created with that sort of occasion in view. Now 
though our information is imperfect, it seems certain that the 
greatest gatherings in the Aegean were Ionian. Bards who 
wished to compete at the Paxégurezs at Delos, at Panionion, 
at Ephesus, must almost of necessity recite in Ionic Greek, and 
change their method of pronunciation as the spoken pronuncia- 
tion changed. We know that there was a Chorus of Maidens at 
Delos which could sing or speak in whatever Greek dialect was 
required of them: each bard or composer ‘would say it was 
himself speaking’ (Hymn. Apoll. 163). But it is the audience, 
not the performer, that eventually determines matters of dialect 
and accent. The performer must adapt himself and the audience 
need not. The Olympian Muses, if their ambition insisted upon 
a great poem and a great audience, must perforce abandon their 
native accent. And later, when the centre of culture passed on 
from Ionia to Athens, they had to repeat the process. 

Aeolis was left in a backwater. And when it emerged, it 
spoke in tones as different from those of its old Homer as can 
well be conceived. Poetry in Lesbos became Traditional Poetry 
no more. We must leave it aside and return to the development 
of Homer in Ionia. 


Xx 
ΠῚ TLiAD AS. AtGREAGSEOEM 


THE HOMERIC SPIRIT AND THE GREATNESS 
OF THE ILIAD 


WE still stand under the spell of the 7zad. Amid the deepest 
strands that are woven in the thread of our Western civilization 
there is more than one which is drawn originally from Greece and 
Greek literature. And at the fountain-head of Greek literature 
there stands, naturally enough, the dateless traditional book, not 
indeed sacred as in other lands, but still unapproachable, and 
far removed from the possibilities of human competition. This 
was the position of the /#Zad in Alexandrian Greece. Rome 
took over the conception, and it has passed on, for the most part, 
to be part of the intellectual heritage of the Western world. 

Criticism has, of course, in some respects, shattered the 
Alexandrian view to pieces. Instead of the primaeval and all-wise 
poet, Homer, we are left with a kind-of saga-figure, similar 
to that of Achilles or Agamemnon, or the mighty flashing- 
helmeted Son of a Shield-Belt. The name Homéros may con- 
ceivably be a name once borne by a living person. But if so, we 
know nothing of him, except indeed that he did not, in any 
complete sense, write the 7/ad and Odyssey. It seems on the 
whole safest to regard Homéros as the name of an imaginary 
ancestor worshipped by the schools of bards called ‘Ounpida: or 
“Ὁμήρου παῖδες, a name parallel to Ion, or Doros, or Hellen, or 
even Amphictyon.! The exact form of theory which we accept 


1 This line of thought has been brilliantly and to my mind conclusively 
developed by Prof. J. A. K. Thomson in Chapter x of his Studzes zn the 
Odyssey. The Aoidos, or Bard, and afterwards the Pozé¢és, is evolved from 
the Exarchon or Leader of the magico-religious dance. Homeros is especi- 
ally the ideal Aozdos or Exarchon of the Delian Maidens, as Apollo is of the 
Muses. They sang (Hes. 7heog. 39) φωνῇ ὁμηρεῦσαι; Homeros is a ritual 
name, generated from this ‘homereia’ and the ‘ Homeridae’ or ‘ Homeristae’. 


Χ THE (SUBJECT ANDTHE *PORT 239 


is of littlke moment. There is a broad general agreement between 
most of the followers and correctors of Wolf and Lachmann. I 
wish in the present lecture to advance no theory of my own, but 
merely to consider what effect this scientific analysis has, or 
should have, upon our general enjoyment and understanding of 
the //Zad as a great poem. 


Mr. Mackail, in his 2.176 of Wiliam Morris, remarks in pass- 
ing that in the 7/ad we have a second-rate subject made into 
a first-rate and indeed incomparable poem by the genius of 
a great poet. I think this view would probably be widely 
accepted. Many scholars would agree, with a pang, that the 
subject of the Wrath was not quite in the first rank of nobleness. 
The Wrath against Hector after Patroclus’ death may be a great 
subject. But the Wrath with Agamemnon about a personal 
slight is not. The fact that in the loss of Briseis it is almost 
entirely the personal slight, not the loss of a beloved being, that 
matters to Achilles, puts all the emotion several degrees lower. 
So much many scholars would admit, and then console them- 
selves by asserting the splendid perfection of the poem and the 
genius of the incomparable poet. 

Now over this-incomparable poet there is much high feeling 
and, in my opinion, some confusion of thought. He certainly 
did not write the whole 7/ad: so much I may take as generally 
admitted. (Though if even that were denied, one might ask 
what is meant by ‘the whole //ad’. Is it the Oxford text? 
Or is it the text of our earliest papyri, probably some thousands 
of lines longer? Or is it the text of Zenodotus or Aristarchus, 
some thousands of lines shorter?) What then exactly did he 
write that is so vastly better than the work of his collaborators 
and followers ? 

The Alexandrians proceeded by the method of ‘ obelizing’ 
certain lines, passages, or whole books. These were ‘ spurious’: 
all the rest was the work of the one Homer. Is this a satis- 
factory method? 

No one would now analyse the Pentateuch by cutting out as 
‘spurious’ the parts that cannot have been written by Moses, 
and leaving Moses author of all the rest. No one would cut out 
all the psalms that cannot have been written by David, and leave 


240 THE RISE OF ‘THE. GREEK “EPIC x 


David author of all the rest. One cannot even apply such 
a method to Isaiah, where it would be much more legitimate. 
Isaiah is a definite historical figure. We know when and where 
he lived. We know his circumstances and his policy. We have 
some criterion for telling what he wrote. Yet even in his case 
this method has completely broken down. The processes through 
which the Book of Isaiah has passed are far too complex for 
a mere division into ‘ genuine’ and spurious’.! Yet this method 
at its crudest is still apt to be applied to the 7Zad. 

As soon as one has grasped the idea of a Traditional Book, it 
is clear beforehand that mere ‘ obelizing’ will lead to no good 
result. It means stripping off one by one the contributions of 
all the poets who have worked at the /Zad. It is like the old 
attempts at restoring the original language of the original kernel, 
only far, far more desperate. And in practice, too, it refuses to 
work. For as you analyse the poem back towards its source, it 
proves not to have one source but many. The Catalogue and 
the Doloneia are almost universally recognized as coming into 
the Zzad from elsewhere; the H7dassy, the book of all others 
which is most quoted in antiquity and seems most to have im- 
pressed the imagination of Greece, is also one of the parts most 
markedly foreign to its present framework. I will not multiply 
instances. Very little reflection is needed to convince us that 
a mere process of stripping off the ‘ non-original’ will not auto- 
matically leave us with the pure work of the incomparable poet. 
If we want to discover him we must search for him. 

And how shall we search? What criteria have we? Inthe 
case of Isaiah we have that prophet’s date, his residence, his 
recorded political activity. What have we for Homer? The 
tradition supplies us with plenty of competing birthplaces, with 
a date which fluctuates between the twelfth century and the sixth, 
and half a dozen confessedly mythical lives. It is hard to make 
much use of these. If we try to discover criteria of our own, 
well, Fick considers that Homer was an Aeolian, and only those 
parts which will turn back into Aeolic are his genuine work. 
Some old English scholars thought he lived in Thessaly, and got 
a criterion out of that. Neither criterion has been successful, for 


1 See, for instance, Prof. Kennett’s Composition of the Book of Isaiah 
(British Academy), 1910; or Box’s /sazah (1908). 


X HE; SUBIECr AND: THE POET 241 


reasons which we need not go into here. One reason was that 
they chose as their field of operation the supposed first origin of 
the poems, where our knowledge is almost nil. Obviously that 
is not a sound method. Beginning at the later end, where there 
is more hope of a safe result, Wilamowitz has forcibly suggested 
that one definite individual can be discovered in @. He wrote 
©, the Broken Battle, in order to make room in the Z/ad for 
the Hmbassy and the Doloneta, I and Κα. If we accept that 
result, we have at any rate one poet whom we can isolate. Bethe, 
again, has come near to persuading us that the man who wrote 
the Converse (Z) also wrote the Ransoming (2), and did a great 
deal towards the general shaping and arranging of the //ad. 
Such a view would perhaps come near to satisfying Miss Stawell ; 
and such a poet, if one felt sure about him, might almost deserve 
the name of ‘Homer’. Yet not quite. He would be a magni- 
ficent poet: of that there is no question. But would he be 
incomparably better than various others? Than the author of 
the Ezbassy, for instance? Or can we confidently say that the 
man who put the Bellerophon passages—or the Sarpedon 
passages, or the Shield-making—into our //7ad was incomparably 
better than the unknown persons who seem to have originally 
written them for different contexts? Can we say that the 7 ας 
owes incomparably more to him than to them? I confess that in 
the present state of our knowledge all such confident language 
about the Poet seems to me unwarranted. We have got the 
Poem, and we can puzzle out a good deal about its probable 
manner of formation. We have not discovered any one historical 
poet. He is at best only a hypothesis, There may of course 
have been a man called Homeros, as there doubtless was a man 
called David. But we know nothing about him, not his date nor 
his birthplace nor what he wrote. And the Homer of our 
imaginations is not he, but a projection of our own feelings, 
a result of our habit of always thinking in terms of persons, 
a mythical Maker to account for the thing made. What we 
really know is not a man but a poem; let us focus our thoughts 
upon that and try to understand its greatness. I believe we 
shall find among the causes of that greatness something nobler 
and more august than the genius of any individual man.} 


1 Compare the case of the Hevacleia. There were evidently many versions 
2760 R 


242 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC x 


I wish first to consider patiently this difficulty. Itis, I suppose, 
quite clear that the //iad is a good poem. Most people have 
only to read it to feel quite sure of the fact : and if any particular 
reader does not feel sure by his own instinct, there is enough 
authority on the subject to convince any but the most self- 
confident that his doubts are ill-grounded. Now why is it that 
the Ziad is a good poem when it has so many of the character- 
istics of a bad one? 

In the first place, as we noticed above, the subject is second- 
rate. The horrid phrase which describes Achilles as ‘ sulking in 
his tent’ is not very far from the truth. And sulking is not 
a noble, nor yet a poetical, state of mind. Achilles, again, is not 
a very sympathetic hero. His eloquence is amazing, and we are 
ready to believe in his dauntless courage and prowess and swift- 
ness of foot. But, if it were not for his mere misery and repent- 
ance at the end of the poem, I think that most readers would 
actually dislike him for his crude pride and self-absorption, his 
cruelty and lack of love. Even his love for Patroclus never 
impresses one as having unselfishness about it: it is not like the 
love of Orestes and Pylades. 

Again, there is a test which most people apply instinctively to 
a modern work of fiction, and which is most powerful in separat- 
ing the good from the bad. I mean the amount of finish and 
conscientiousness in the more hidden parts. What we call 
‘showy’ or ‘flashy’ work is generally work in which the 


of that epic, and their ‘Homer’ is sometimes referred to as ‘he who made’, 
sometimes as ‘they who made’ the Herac/eza. (Eratosthenes ap. Strab., 
p. 688 vi τὴν Ηρακλείαν ποιήσαντες. It means, I suppose, ‘the various people 
who put the Heracles-saga into verse’. Cf. Schol. V on π 57 οἱ τῶν Κυπρίων 
ποιηταί.) But the interesting thing is that among them we know of three 
distinct individuals: Pisander of Rhodes, Peisinods of Rhodes, and Panyassis 
of Halicarnassus. There were doubtless others as well. Now Paul 
Friedlaender (Philologische Untersuchungen, vol. xix) has made a brilliant 
study of the Heracleia problem. By analysis of the myth and the local data 
he succeeds in tracing several stages in the development of the Heracles- 
saga: an epic poem, the Dodecath/os, made not in Argos nor yet in Boeotia, 
but in Rhodes, with the Rhodian goddess Alektrona-Electryone as the hero’s 
mother; an expanded Rhodian form; and a later Samian and Coan 
reshaping. These three stages correspond fairly well with the three authors, 
two Rhodian and one from Halicarnassus; and if the Hevacleta were extant 
we could probably separate and appraise their respective contributions. We 
have no such data for the //vad and Odyssey. A good attempt at finding 
personal qualities in the poems in Cauer, Grundfr.’, pp. 548 ff. Also, though 
with too much dogma, in Rothe, on Repetitions and Contradictions. 


ee Oe ee 


x FLAWS IN THE ‘ILIAD’ 243 


momentary effect of particular scenes is strong, but which will 
not bear looking into. If you look close you find weaknesses, 
inconsistencies, contradictions. Now, notoriously, this is the 
case with the 7/ad. The wall round the Greek camp alone, 
though the writing about it is always good and stirring, will 
provide half a dozen glaring instances of this sort of inner flaw. 
It is built at the end of H in the tenth year of the war. Yet 
a phrase in the description of the camp later (Ξ 31) implies that 
it was built—as it naturally would be—in the first. In M 10-33 
it remains ‘ steadfast’ (ἔμπεδον) till the end of the war and is then 
destroyed by floods ; but in O 361, before the death of Patroclus, 
it is swept away by Apollo like a child’s castle of sand on the 
sea-shore. Its towers had been broken in M 399. In M and N 
the wall is sometimes present and sometimes absent. Also two 
separate heroes, Hector and Sarpedon, are mentioned in different 
places, and in exactly the same words, as being the first to get 
over it (M 438, II 558). There is a fearful fight when the 
Trojans are attacking the wall to get to the ships: when they 
retreat in panic there is generally no wall there. All this is 
explained in detail in Dr. Leaf’s commentary.' It is pretty clear 
that there were two versions of the fighting extant, one in which 
the camp was unfortified, and one in which it was provided with 
a wall and moat. And brilliant episodes are borrowed from one 
or the other as the minstrels pleased. 

Again, there is the cardinal instance of the contradiction be- 
tween Books II and I. In Book II, Achilles, as he sees the 
routed Greeks, breaks into a splendid complaint that if only 
Agamemnon would seek his friendship and offer him amends the 
Trojans would soon fly and ‘ choke the trenches with their dead’. 
He sends Patroclus forth to help the Greeks, but warns him not 
to go too far in pursuit, lest Agamemnon should feel too secure 
and should fail to offer atonement. 

Obviously, then, Agamemnon has not offered atonement. Yet 
there is a book before this which is occupied from first to last 
entirely with Agamemnon’s offers of princely atonement! One 
sees what has happened. Both passages lay before some com- 


1 The late Professor Earle—anticipated, I find, by Hermann—shows 
reason to suspect that Thucydides used an //éad which did not contain the 
account of the Wall-building in H. Earle, Collected Essays, pp. 142 ff. See 
Chapter XII, p. 295 n. 


ἘΠ .2 


244 THE ΙΒ OF THE GREEK VBEIC X 


piler of the Ziad. They were not consistent, but each was too 
good to lose. He put both in, sacrificing, like a bad artist, the 
whole to the part. 

Thirdly, there is the same sort of fault running through many 
of the descriptions. Even the battle scenes, vivid as they are, 
will sometimes not bear thinking out. As we saw in the case of 
the breastplate, the poet has not fully thought out the words he 
was using. It sounds well. It is exciting. But it is not real. 
It is like a battle composed by some romantic poet, who furnishes 
his warriors with gleaming morions and resounding culverins, 
but is not quite sure what things they are. 

Apply the same test even to the language, the miraculous 
heaven-sent language which has been the wonder and the awe 
of all poets afterwards. Is it not full of such ‘morions’ and 
‘culverins’? Do you not find upon every page fair-sounding 
words, whose meaning seems to have been far from clear to the 
poets themselves who used them? Of course it is rare to find 
a definite substantive of which the meaning is quite unknown, 
though even such occur: for instance, in the case of epithets 
of the gods. Ἑρμείας ἀκάκητα, διάκτορος ἀργεϊφόντης, not one 
of the epithets is understood. There are also a few words which 
are used in two senses, of which we can fairly say that one 
is a mistake.! But it is more often the form of the word or 
sentence that shows a lack of understanding. There are crowds 
of words which, as they stand, are no words but only mistakes, 
old forms first miswritten and then wrongly recorrected so as 
to fill up the metre. There are words first wrongly divided, 
like νήδυμος, and then wrongly explained. 

1 For example, δουπῆσαι means ‘to make a noise’ (= ψοφῆσαι say the 
Lexica), but owing to the phrase δούπησεν δὲ πεσών, ‘he crashed as he fell’, 
the old Glossographi, who explained the hard words in Homer in pre- 
Alexandrian times, interpreted it as simply ‘to die’. Aristarchus has to 
correct them (οἱ γλωσσογράφοι τὸ δουπῆσαι ἕν ἀνθ᾽ ἑνὸς ἀντὶ τοῦ ἀποθανεῖν). 
But the writer of Ψ 679 uses the phrase δεδουπότος Οἰδιπόδαο for ‘when the 
son of Oedipus (?) was slain’, τεθνηκότος. That is, he misunderstood the old 
usage, just as the Glossographi did. (See Lehrs, Av7starchus, p. 103 f.; of 
course there are ways of escape suggested by the grammarians.) Again, the 
word στεῦται, orevto, looks as if it meant ‘stands, stood’, but really meant 

‘intended’, or perhaps ‘boasted’. So Aristarchus (Lehrs, p . 98f.). But in 
A 5&4 it is used as ‘stood’ , στεῦτο δὲ διψάων, πιέειν δ᾽ οὐκ εἶχεν ἑλέσθαι. And 
Aristarchus can only condemn the lines: ἵστατο viv ἐπὶ ποδῶν" κέχρηται δὲ τῇ 


λέξει ὁ διασκευαστὴς παρὰ τὴν τοῦ ποιητοῦ συνήθειαν is Aristonicus’s note. 
These are not isolated phenomena. 


x CONFUSION IN LANGUAGE: IN SIMILES 245 


Now, of course, a great deal of this is mere ‘ surface corrup- 
tion’. Many mistakes are only due to the latest rhapsodes, who 
recited the Ionic poem in Attica, and thus inevitably introduced 
Attic elements into the language, and even misunderstood the 
older Ionic forms. You can largely remove the Atticisms and 
obvious errors. Editors like Van Leeuwen and Platt and Rzach 
have corrected them by the hundred, with most useful and 
instructive results. But the process of correction is never com- 
plete. Clear away the Attic surface and there rises beneath 
another surface with another set of corruptions, where Ionic 
rhapsodes have introduced just the same elements of confusion 
into an Aecolic, or at least a pre-Ionic, language. The confusion 
of tongues is deep down in the heart of the Homeric dialect, and 
no surgery in the world can cut beneath it. 

Of course one must not judge a poet as one would a gram- 
marian. Yet this confusion of tongues has a certain weight as 
evidence. It seems to be part of a general vagueness of treat- 
ment, a lack of precision and of grip. 

We often find, too, that descriptive phrases are not used so as 
accurately to fit the thing described. They are caught up ready- 
made from a store of such things: perpetual epithets, front 
halves of lines, back halves of lines, whole lines, if need be, and 
long formulae. The stores of the poets were full and brimming. 
A bard need only put in his hand and choose out a well- 
sounding phrase. Even the similes are ready-made. There 
must have been originally some poet who saw the spring of some 
warrior in battle, and was struck by its likeness to the leap of 
a lion. But that was long before our //ad. The poets of our 
Iliad scarcely need to have seena lion. They have their stores 
of traditional similes taken from almost every moment in a lion’s 
life: when he is hungry, when he is full, when he attacks the 
fold, when he retires from the fold, when he is wounded, when he 
is triumphant, when he is scared with torches, when he walks 
ravening in the wind and rain. Every simile is fine, vivid, and 
lifelike ; but a good many of them are not apposite to the case 
for which they are used, and all have the same ready-made air. 

Consider in detail this fine simile (M 41): 


As in the midst of hounds and men that are hunters, 
a boar or a lion wheels, glaring in his strength; and they 


246 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC Χ 


set them like a wall (πυργηδόν) and stand against him, and 
the spears fly fast from their hands; yet his proud heart 
trembles not nor flees, till his daring is his death, but swiftly 
he turns and turns, making trial of the lines of men; and 
wheresoever he charges, the lines of men give way. 

The description of the boar or lion is splendid: but what 
situation does it seem to describe? A hero left alone, hard 
pressed by enemies but refusing to retreat? That is what one 
thinks of. That is probably the situation for which it was 
originally written. But, as the passage stands, the Greeks are 
flying and Hector pursuing them back beyond their wall. The 
passage continues: ‘Even so Hector, going up and down the 
throng, besought his comrades, urging them to cross the trench.’ 
Hector, urging on his conquering comrades, is really not parti- 
cularly like this surrounded and baffled lion, ‘ whose daring is 
his death’. 

Now at a point of the action immediately before this—there is 
a digression between—in A 551, there is a hero very like indeed 
to this boar or lion, to wit, Aias, who has been up to the last 
moment standing alone against the advance of the Trojans and 
protecting the Greek retreat. At the end Zeus sent into him 
also a spirit of flight. 

He moved backward, searching with his eyes as a wild 
beast searches, back toward the throng of his comrades, 
half turning again and again, slowly changing knee for 
knee. Even asa red lion draws back from a yard of oxen, 
frighted by hounds and husbandmen keeping vigil all night 
long, who suffer him not to take out the fat of the oxen; 
and hungering for flesh, he charges but wins nothing; so 
fast fly spears from brave hands to meet him, and flaming 
torches, which he shrinks from for all his fury ; and at dawn 
he goes away alone with misery in his heart: so then did 
Aias go back from the Trojans, unwilling and with misery 
in hisheart. For he feared for the ships of the Achaeans. 


There follows instantly another simile, slightly strange perhaps 
to our conventional taste, but very vivid and good: 


Even as an ass going beside a field overpowers the boys 
who drive him, a dull ass about whose back many a staff 
is broken ; and he enters the standing corn and ravages it, 
and the boys smite him with sticks, but their strength is 
feeble, and scarcely do they drive him out when he has had 


x CONFUSED SIMILES IN M 247 
his fill of the corn. So then about Aias the tall, son of 


Telamon, high-hearted Trojans and allies famed afar 
followed thrusting, &c., &c. 


Now think of our first simile, the lion or boar surrounded 
and confronted by a wall of men and hounds, but refusing to 
retire. Does it not seem to belong here rather than to its 
present context? Did it not perhaps describe the state of Aias 
just a moment earlier, while he still stood alone and Zeus had not 
yet sent into him that ‘fear for the Achaean ships’? I think, 
agreeing with Leaf and others, that this must have been the 
original place for which the simile was written. The rhapsode 
who was composing our eleventh and twelfth book found in 
various MSS., that came somehow into his hands, no less than 
three different similes applied to Aias covering the Greek retreat. 
He put two of them straight in together, the midnight lion and 
the ass inthe corn. The other was far too good to lose, so he 
kept it by him to use at the first opportunity. Early in the next 
book came the mention of a wall, which checks for a time the 
rush of the Trojans ; it so happens that the hounds and hunters 
of the simile were said to be like a wall. That place will do. 
The incongruity will be decently masked. So he puts it in there; 
and at present the triumphant advance of Hector is compared to 
the stubbornness of a baffled boar or lion refusing to retreat. 

Does this explanation fail to carry conviction? Demonstra- 
tion is, of course, impossible in these questions of criticism. But 
take another case in the same book. When the Trojans 
(M 131 ff.) are charging at the gate of the Greek wall, they find 
there standing tn_front of the gate ¢wo heroes of the race of the 
Lapithae, Polypoites and Leonteus. 

They two in front of the high gate were standing like 
high-crested oaks on a mountain, which abide the wind and 
the rain through all days, firm in their long roots that reach 
deep into the earth. 


A moment after we are told of these same two men :— 


Out then they charged and fought in front of the gates, 
like wild boars on a mountain, who abide the oncoming 
throng of men and hounds, and charging side-long break 
the underwood about them, tearing it root-wise up, and 
through all else comes the noise of gnashing tusks... . So 


248 THE RISE “OF THE GREEK, EPIC Χ 


came through all else the noise of the bright bronze upon 
their bodies, smitten with shafts in front. 
People who stand firm in front of a gate, like oaks, are not very 
like wild boars that rush out and tear up the undergrowth, 
making a noise with their tusks. This may sound captious: but 
the difficulty is quite real, and was felt in ancient times. 
Different solutions are offered, for instance, by Porphyry and 
Hephaestion. Did not the last compiler of M find in two 
different books two different accounts of this fight at the gate? 
In one the two Lapithae alone stood like oaks. In another a 
mass of Greeks charged out, led very possibly, but not certainly, 
by the two Lapithae. Both similes were too good to lose. He 
followed the story of the oaks, yet he was reluctant to lose the 
wild boars. So observe his mode of procedure. He puts in the 
wild boars, and then, at the end, soothes the imagination of any 
hearer who is puzzled at the lack of resemblance, by explaining 
that the point of similarity lies in the noise. The contradiction is 
masked. Boars’ tusks make a noise, and so do shields struck 
with spears "ἢ 
Another simile, fifteen lines later, makes of this hypothesis 
almost what in this atmosphere of conjectures may be called 
a certainty. Asius, who is leading the Trojan attack, cries out 
that ‘these men are like a swarm of bees or wasps who have 
built their nests beside a rocky path, and pour out to fight with 
hunters to protect their young’. That comparison can scarcely 
have been invented to describe two solitary heroes standing in 
front of a gate. It may well have described a great mass of 
Greeks pouring out through the gate. But that was part of the 
rejected story. It belonged to the same version as the rushing 
wild boars.” 


τ An idiom by which ‘a mere detail in the original scheme of the simile is 
made the base of a fresh simile’ (Leaf) has many parallels in Homer, but 
hardly in such an extreme degree as this. The passage O 618 ff. is very 
similar, and probably has a similar history. Hector’s onset is compared 
(1) to waves falling on a rock, which stands immovable; (2) to a wave 
crashing down upon a ship, which is badly shaken; then comes v. 629, 
“even so was the spirit of the Achaeans shaken within their breasts.’ I sus- 
pect that these two similes come from separate sources; the minstrel felt 
them to be not quite consistent, so he added v. 629. It is worth remarking 
that the five lines just preceding are inconsistent with their present context, 
and were condemned by Zenodotus and Aristarchus. 

2. Bréal, 1. c., p. 115, traces the double names in the languages of gods and 


x ORIGINALITY 249 


These are mere illustrations. The force of the argument, of 
course, depends upon the number of such cases. 

The conclusion is hard to resist, and it is one that seems to 
detract enormously from the high value of the poems as original 
poetry. Even the similes, the very breath of life of the poetry of 
Homer, are in many cases, indeed usually, adopted ready-made. 
Their vividness, their closeness of observation, their air of 
freshness and spontaneity, are all deceptive. Nearly all of them 
are taken over from older books, and many of them were origin- 
ally written to describe some quite different occasion. 


All these qualities, which we have arrayed in a catalogue, have 
one common characteristic, and that one which is generally 
considered fatal to any art which claims to be what we call 
‘original’ or ‘individual’, a thing created by a particular man. 
I do not say that Homer has no other flaws. But as to these 
already mentioned, I venture to think that we only find them 
vicious because we are judging by wrong standards. We are 
applying to a traditional poem, the creation of whole generations 
of men, poets and hearers, working through many ages, canons 
which only apply to the works to which we are accustomed in 
modern literature, original poems, made at a definite date by 
a definite self-conscious author. 

The subject is a difficult one, and I am not sure that I see 
clearly through it. But I will try to give the result of my 
thoughts. 


First of all, I think that we are apt to confuse originality with 
a much less important thing, novelty. A story about motor-cars 
or wireless telegraphy possesses, or once possessed, novelty ; 
but whether it ever possessed originality depended entirely on 
qualities in the author’s mind. 

Of course, there was originality in conceiving the notion of 
bringing the motor-car or the wireless telegraph into the realm 
of art. A very small modicum of originality, but still some. 
And I would not say that such originality was contemptible, 
because one of the ways in which art advances is by the opening 


of men to the same multiplicity of sources. One source said Bptdpews, another 
Alyaiwy (A 404). So also Milder, Que//en, pp. 65, 139, 223. 


250 THE “RISE ‘OF ΤῊΝ GREBIC EPIC Χ 


up of new regions to its influence, or, in other words, by the 
discovery of beauty or interest in new places. Also, the man 
who conceives or executes a thing for the first time is no doubt 
apt to do so with a freshness and intensity which make his work 
not only novel but original. But the difference between the two 
qualities is clear. Mere novelty is a thing external and acci- 
dental. It depends upon dates. It wears off. For instance, the 
Hippolytus seems to have been the first love tragedy in European 
literature. In that sense it was novel, but its novelty has worn 
off during these last two thousand three hundred years. Yet its 
originality is living still and felt vividly. 

Origo means a spring, a rising of water. And, though it is 
generally a mere waste of ingenuity to tie the sense of a word 
down to its supposed derivation, I suspect that the most fruitful 
way of understanding the word ‘originality’ may be to re- 
member this meaning. We do call a work of art original when 
it produces the impression of a living source, so that one says: 
‘Here is beauty or wisdom sfrzzging; not drawn through long 
pipes nor collected in buckets.’ This spring-like self-moving 
quality is a thing which does not depend on novelty, and there- 
fore cannot grow stale. I remember examining in Florence a 
MS. of Euripides, which was very hard to read, blurred with 
age and sea-water and exposure to the sun. And as I pored 
over it, there gradually showed through the dusty blur the first 
words of a lyric in the 4écestis. It was as old as the hills, and I 
had long known it by heart. Yet the freshness of it glowed 
through that rather stale air like something young and living. 
I remember a feeling of flowers and of springing water. 

This quality has not much to do with novelty. Probably it 
does imply that the poet has in some sense gone himself to the 
fountain-head, that his emotion is a real first-hand emotion, self- 
moving and possessed of a life of its own, not merely a derivative 
emotion responding to the emotion of another. Yet I doubt 
if even so much can be fairly demanded, that a poet, to be 
original, must himself go to the fountain-head. The words are 
ambiguous, It would be preposterous to demand that a writer 
shall experience personally all that he writes about. And it is 
very noteworthy how many great poets seem to have drawn 
most of their inspiration not directly from experience, but deriva- 


xX INTENSITY OF IMAGINATION IN HOMER 251 


tively from experience already interpreted in other men’s poetry. 
Think of Burns's songs. There is almost no poetry so original 
in the impression it makes. And yet we have detailed evidence 
that a great deal of Burns’s most beautiful and spontaneous work 
is really a working up of old traditional material. He thought 
over the words and rhythm of an existing country song while 
his wife sang the air, and thus gradually he modified the existing 
verses and added others, till a song was produced, a song both 
new and old, derivative and yet highly original. I suspect that 
the mistake which we are apt to make is to apply a merely 
external test to ee that depends on the most intimate 
workings of a man’s imagination. The thing that is of impor- 
tance in a poem, given the necessary technical. ‘power, is not 
mere novelty, nor yet personal knowledge or experience, but 
simply the intensity of imagination with which the poet has 
realized his subject. And that intensity may be the product 
of a thousand things; of which personal experience may, but 
need not, be one. Almost the first characteristic which one 
notes in what we call a ‘man of genius’ is his power of making 
a very little experience reach an enormous way. This sounds 
very different from Carlyle’s definition of genius as an infinite 
capacity for taking pains, But in reality that capacity for taking 
pains is itself dependent on an intense and absorbing interest. 
So long as you are really interested, you cannot help taking 
pains. As the interest fades, you first begin to be conscious of 
the pains, and then cease to take any more. 

In the same way, when we blame a work of Art as ‘con- 
ventional’ or ‘laboured’ or the like, we are often using language 
loosely. A laboured work is of course not a work on which the 
man has worked hard: it is a work in which the labour is more 
manifest than the result, or in which one is somehow conscious 
of labour. Pains have been taken, but some other factor of 
success is not there. A conventional work is not a work com- 
posed according to the rules of some convention or other. All 
art is that. It is a work in which other qualities are lacking, and 
the convention obtrudes itself. 


Intensity of imagination is the important thing. It is intensity 
of imagination that makes a poet’s work ‘real’, as we say ; 


252 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC X 


spontaneous, infectious or convincing. Especially it is this that 
creates an atmosphere; that makes us feel, on opening the pages 
of a book, that we are in a different world, and a world full of 
real beings about whom, in one way or another, we care. And 
I suspect that ultimately the greatness of a poem or work of ima- 
ginative art depends mostly upon two questions: how strongly 
we feel ourselves transported to this new world, and what sort 
of a world it is when we get there, how great or interesting or 
beautiful.1_ Think of the first scene of Hamzet, the first page of 
the Divina Commedia, the first lines of the 4gamemnon; how 
swiftly and into what wonderful regions they carry you! And 
if you apply this same test to the /Zad or Odyssey, the response 
is 50 amazing that you understand at once why these poems have 
so often and in such various ages been considered absolutely of 
all the greatest. Open the book anywhere (A 33). ‘So spake 
he, and the old man trembled and obeyed his word; and he 
went in silence by the shore of the many-sounding sea, and 
prayed alone to the Lord Apollo, whom fair-haired Leto bare.’ 
Turn the pages (Σ᾽ 573). ‘Anda herd he wrought thereon of 
straight-horned kine. The kine were wrought of gold and of 
tin, and lowing they wended forth from the byre to their pasture, 
by the side of a singing river, by a bed of slender reeds.’ Turn 
again (X 356). ‘I look upon thee and know thee as thou art. 
I could never have moved thee, for the heart is iron within thy 
breast. Therefore beware lest I be to thee a wrath of god, on 
that day when Paris and Phoebus Apollo shall slay thee in thy 
valour at the Scaean Gates.’ ” 


‘ Of course, in proportion as art becomes more realistic the ‘new world’ 
in question becomes more and more closely the present world more vividly 
felt and understood. 


᾿ “Os ear’, ἔδεισεν δ᾽ ὁ γέρων καὶ ἐπείθετο μύθῳ" 


βῆ δ᾽ ἀκέων παρὰ θῖνα πολυφλοίσβοιο θαλάσσης" 
πολλὰ δ᾽ ἔπειτ᾽ ἀπάνευθε κιὼν ἠρᾶθ' ὁ γεραιὸς 
᾿Απόλλωνι ἄνακτι, τὸν NUKopos τέκε Λητώ. (A 33 ff.) 


Ἔν δ᾽ ἀγέλην ποίησε βοῶν ὀρθοκραιράων" 
αἱ δὲ βόες χρυσοῖο τετεύχατο κασσιτέρου τε, 
μυκηθμῷ δ᾽ ἀπὸ κόπρου ἐπεσσεύοντο νομόνδε 
πὰρ ποταμὸν κελάδοντα, παρὰ ῥοδανὸν δονακῆα. (Σ 573 ff.) 


Ἦ σ᾽ εὖ λον προτιόσσομαι, οὐδ᾽ ἄρ᾽ ἔμελλον 
πείσειν * ἢ γὰρ σοί γε σιδήρεος ἐν φρεσὶ θυμός" 

φράζεο νῦν, μή τοί τι θεῶν μήνιμα γένωμαι 

ἤματι τῷ ὅτε κέν σε Πάρις καὶ Φοῖβος ᾿Απόλλων 
ἐσθλὸν ἐόντ᾽ ὀλέσωσιν ἐνὶ Σκαιῇσι πύλῃσιν. (Χ 356 ff.) 


X JEHU AND” HELEN 253 


How irresistibly do the chance words bear one away, and to 
what a world! We can stand apart and argue and analyse, and 
show that the real world portrayed in the poems was one full 
of suffering and injustice, and that the poet was sometimes over- 
lax in his moral judgements. Yet the world into which he 
takes us is somehow more splendid than any created by other 
men. Where were there ever battles or heroes like these, such 
beauty, such manliness, such terror and pity and passion, and 
such all-ruling majesty of calm? There are many strong men 
and fair women in other stories; why is it that, almost before a 
word is spoken, we feel in our bones the strength of these 
Homeric heroes, the beauty of these grave and white-armed 
women? You remember, in the Old Testament, the watchman 
who stood upon the tower in Jezreel, when they saw men and 
chariots approaching in the distance, and sent out one horseman 
after another to inquire their purpose. ‘And the watchman 
answered and said: He came even unto them and cometh not 
again. And the driving is like the driving of Jehu the son of 
Nimshi; for he driveth furiously... We knew nothing about the 
driving of Jehu before. We hear no word more about it after- 
wards. But the one sentence has behind it just that intensity of 
imagination which makes thoughts live and vibrate like new 
things a hundred, or a thousand, or two thousand, years after 
their first utterance. And that is the quality that one finds in 
Homer. 

Think how the beauty of Helen has lived through the ages. 
Like the driving of Jehu, it is now an immortal thing. And the 
main, though not of course the sole, source of the whole concep- 
tion is certainly the 7é/ad. Yet in the whole /éad there is 
practically not a word spoken in description of Helen. As 
Lessing has remarked in a well-known passage of the Laokoon, 
almost the whole of our knowledge of Helen’s beauty comes 
from a few lines in the third book, where Helen goes up to the 
wall of Troy to see the battle between Menelaus and Paris. ‘So 
speaking, the goddess put into her heart a longing for her 
husband of yore and her city and her father and mother. And 
straightway she veiled herself with white linen, and went forth 
from her chamber shedding a great tear....’ The elders of 
Troy were seated on the wall, and when they saw Helen coming, 


254 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC x 


‘softly they spake to one another winged words: “ Small wonder 
that the Trojans and mailed Greeks should endure pain through 
many years for sucha woman. Strangely like she ts tu face to 
some tmmortal spirit.”’! Thatis all we know. Not one of all 
the Homeric bards fell into the yawning trap of describing Helen, 
and making a catalogue of her features. She was veiled; she 
was weeping; and she was strangely like in face to some 
immortal spirit. And the old men, who strove for peace, could 
feel no anger at the war. 

Now this intensity of imagination can be attained by many 
writers at their most exalted moments. Their imagination can 
follow the call of their emotions. But one of the extraordinary 
things in the Z/ad is the prevalence of this intensity all through 
the ordinary things of life. ‘As riseth the screaming of cranes 
in front of the sunrise, cranes that have fled from winter and 
measureless rain, screaming they fly over the streams oft 
ocean, bearing unto the dwarf-men battle and death.? Who 
that can once read Homer freely, untroubled by difficulties of 
language, can ever forget the cranes? And not only the cranes, 
but the swarming bees, the flies about the milk-pails, the wolves 
and boars and lions and swift dogs, and the crook-horned swing- 
footed kine? It is a fairly wide world that the poets lay open to 
us, and every remotest corner of it is interesting and vivid, 
every commonest experience in it, the washing of hands, the 
eating of food, the acts of sleeping and waking, shares some- 
how in the beauty and even in the grandeur of the whole. 
Mr. Mackail* has observed how full the poems are of images 
drawn from fire: the bright armour flashes like fire, the armies 


" “Qs εἰποῦσα θεὰ γλυκὺν ἵμερον ἔμβαλε θυμῷ 

ἀνδρός te προτέροιο καὶ ἄστεος ἠδὲ τοκήων" 

αὐτίκα δ᾽ ἀργεννῇσι καλυψαμένη ὀθόνῃσιν 

ὡρμᾶτ᾽ ἐκ θαλάμοιο τέρεν κατὰ δάκρυ χέουσα. (Τ' 139 ff.) 


"Ha πρὸς ἀλλήλους ἔπεα πτερόεντ᾽ ἀγόρευον" 

“Οὐ νέμεσις Τρῶας καὶ ἐὐϊκνήμιδας ᾿Αχαιοὺς 

τοιῇ δ᾽ ἀμφὶ γυναικὶ πολὺν χρόνον ἄλγεα πάσχειν" 
αἰνῶς ἀθανάτῃσι θεῇς εἰς ὦπα ἔοικεν." (I 155 fi.) 
"Hire περ κλαγγὴ γεράνων πέλει οὐρανόθι πρό, 

αἵ τ᾽ ἐπεὶ οὖν χειμῶνα φύγον καὶ ἀθέσφατον ὄμβρον, 
κλαγγῇ Tai γε πέτονται ἐπ᾽ ᾿ΩὩκεανοῖο ῥοάων, 

ἀνδράσι Πυγμαίοισι φόνον καὶ κῆρα φέρουσαι. (Τ' 3 ff.) 


* In one of his lectures as Professor of Poetry at Oxford. 


x ‘EVEN AS BURNING FIRE’ 255 


clash, ‘even as destroying fire that falls upon a limitless forest’ ; 
a hero’s ‘hands are like unto fire and his wrath unto red iron’; 
and the men ‘ fight together, a body of burning fire’. The whole 
poem is shot through with this fire, which seems like a symbol 
of the inward force of which we have been speaking, a fiery 
intensity of imagination. Given this force within, and the 
Homeric language as an instrument for its expression, a language 
more gorgeous than Milton’s, yet as simple and direct as that of 
Burns, there is no further need to be surprised at the extra- 
ordinary greatness of the /éad. 


But now comes a curious observation. We who are accus- 
tomed to modern literature always associate this sort of imagina- 
tive intensity with something personal. We connect it with an 
artist’s individuality, or with originality in the sense of ‘ newness ’. 
It seems as though, under modern conditions, an artist usually 
did not feel or imagine intensely unless he was producing some 
work which was definitely his own and not another’s, work 
which must bear his personal name and be marked by his personal 
experience or character. One element at least in the widespread 
admiration of such authors as Browning, Meredith, and Walt 
Whitman, has been, I think, a feeling that their work must some- 
how be particularly real and spontaneous, because they have 
insisted on doing it in a way in which, according to most well- 
constituted judges, it ought not to be done. And conversely, 
poets like Tennyson or Swinburne have been in certain circles 
despised as a little tame, conventional, uninspired, because they 
seemed to be too obedient to the ideals which poetry had 
followed before them. I do not specially wish to attack this 
modern prejudice, if it is one. I largely share in it: and its 
excesses will very likely disappear. But I do very greatly wish 
to point out that artistic feeling in this matter has not always been 
the same. Artists have not always wished to stamp their work 
with their personal characteristics or even their personal name. 
Artists have sometimes been, as it were, Protestant or Iconoclast, 
unable to worship without asserting themselves against the 
established ritual of their religion: sometimes, in happier circum- 
stances, they have accepted and loved the ritual as part of the 
religion, and wrought out their own new works of poetry, not as 


256 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC x 


protests, not as personal outbursts, but as glad and nameless 
offerings, made in prescribed form to enhance the glory of the 
spirit whom they served. With some modifications, this seems 
to have been the case in Greece, in Canaan, in Scandinavia, 
during the periods when great traditional books were slowly 
growing up. Lach successive poet did not assert himself against 
the tradition, but gave himself up to the tradition, and added to 
its greatness and beauty all that was in him. 

The intensity of imagination which makes the Z/ad alive is 
_ not, it seems to me, the imagination of any one man. It means 
᾿ not that one man of genius created a wonder and passed away. 
It means that generation after generation of poets, trained in the 
same schools and a more or less continuous and similar life, 
steeped themselves to the lips in the spirit of this great poetry. 
They lived in the Epic saga and by it and for it. Great as it was, 
for many centuries they continued to build it up yet greater. 

What helped them most, perhaps, was the constancy with 
which the whole race—to use a slightly inaccurate word—must 
have loved and cherished this poetry. Amid the chaos that 
followed μετὰ τὰ Τρωικά, when the works of art, the architecture, 
the laws of ordered society, the very religions of the different 
centres, were all lost, for the most part never to return, the germs 
of this poetry were saved. The fugitives left their treasures, 
their gods, and their wives behind, but the sagas were in their 
hearts and grew the richer for all their wanderings. They 
carried their poetry as other nations have carried their religion. 
How strange and significant a thing, after all, is that which we 
speak of as either ‘the Epic style’ or ‘the Epic language’. It 
seems more than a style, though, as we have seen, it cannot quite 
be treated as an organic spoken language. 

For many hundreds of years this wonderful mode of speech 
was kept alive to serve nothing but the needs of poetry. The 
ordinary audiences must have understood it as well as, for instance, 
our audiences understand the authorized version of the Bible, 
though the differences between Jacobean and Victorian English 
are utterly trifling compared with those between Homer and the 
prose speech of classical Ionic inscriptions. And how wonder- 
fully the poets themselves knew it! Even under the microscope 
of modern philology the Epic dialect appears, in the main, as a 


x SELF-ASSERTION AND SELF-DEVOTION 257 


sort of organic whole, not a mere mass of incongruous archaistic 
forms. Van Leeuwen and Monro can write consistent grammars 
of it. And this language has been preserved and reconstructed 
by generations of men who never spoke it except when they 
recited poetry. It was understood by audiences who never 
heard it spoken except when they listened to poetry. And not 
a man among them had any knowledge of the laws of language ; 


« they had only a sense of style. 


But to meet the special difficulties raised above, let us consider 
especially the later generations of these bards and the task 
that lay before them. They were poets, ‘makers’ as well as 
‘singers’; but, much more than that, they were Homérzdae, or 
Homérou Paides, the sons and servants of the greatest of the 
poets. None of them dreamed of vying with Homer; only of 
exalting and preserving him. Other people no doubt might 
wish for a new style of poetry, for lyrics, for elegies, for iambic 
and personal verse. The old Epic language was becoming less 
known and more remote. The meanings of some of the words 
were taught in schools, others had been forgotten. And the 
last bards had before them various books, not very many, it 
seems, telling the great legends. 

Iam not looking for the work of any particular compiler or 
harmonizer; I am merely trying to understand the spirit in 
which any one of these later poets—how great or how small a 
poet matters littlke—seems to have set about his task. He could 
have written an epic poem himself, of course: but who wanted 
him to write one? How should he dare to? The world was 
not yet reduced to such straits as that. There was plenty of the 
old poetry still in his power. He knew it by heart, and he 
possessed scrolls of it, poetry of men far greater and wiser than 
he, voices of those who had talked with gods. Diligently and 
reverently he wove it together. He had before him—let us 
imagine—a Wrath in which Agamemnon offered no atonement, 
and he found besides a lay telling of the Embassy to Achilles; 
or he had before him some battles around an unwalled Greek 
camp and found another version with the storming of a wall; or 
perhaps he merely found fragments of other epics too good to 
lose and not too firmly rooted in their context to transfer. 
Diligently and reverently, with a good deal of simple cunning, 


2760 5 


258 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC Χ 


he arranged his scheme so as to make room for all. He put 
inconsistent passages far apart; he altered a few words to mask 
awkwardnesses and get rid of stark contradictions. He added 
lines, when he needs must, to connect or to explain; always 
unobtrusive lines, making no dissonance, borrowed word by 
word, phrase by phrase, from the old poems themselves. And, 
amid all this gentle and lowly service, when he rehearsed his 
great recitation, when he went over the lines of some tremendous 
passage that shook all his being, then, it would seem from the 
evidence, there came into him the spirit of the ancient men, and 
a voice as of Homer himself. The lines that he spoke became 
his own. He had always belonged to them, and now they 
belonged to him also. And in the midst of them and beyond 
them he too had freedom to create. 

And we critics, we mete to him a hard measure. When he 
creates, we call it interpolation. When he preserves with careful 
ingenuity all the fragments that he can save of his ancient Homer, 
we call attention to the small joints in his structure, the occasional 
incongruity of a simile which he loved too well to let die. If we 
knew his name, I suppose we should mock at him. But he has 
no name. He gave his name, as he gave all else that was in 
him, to help, unnoticed, in the building up of the greatest 
poem that ever sounded on the lips of men. 


There is, outside and beneath the ordinary rules of art, 
a quality possessed by some great books or pictures and denied 
to others, a quality of attracting sympathy and causing the 
imagination of the reader or spectator to awake and co-operate 
with that of the artist. It is a quality that sometimes irritates 
a critic, because it acts fitfully and often depends upon accident. 
It puts the efforts of art at the mercy of prejudice. Yet, in 
a clear air, when prejudices can be laid aside and forgotten, this 
quality is seen to be, despite its occasional connexion with very 
third-rate things, itself a great thing, like the power of attracting 
or not attracting love. And in the last analysis, I suspect, one 
will find that this sympathy, like love in general, mostly goes to 
the man who both wants it and will duly pay for it. A poet who 
strikes his reader as perfect—of course none ever are so—who 
makes the impression of having entirely succeeded in saying 


ΝΥ 


x THE APPEAL OF TRADITIONAL BOOKS 259 


what he meant to say, so that he requires no help from others, is 
apt to be treated with some respectful indifference. If he actually 
seems self-satisfied, then it is much worse. The reader becomes 
lynx-eyed for weaknesses, anxious to humiliate, like Ruskin, for 
instance, in his criticisms of Guido and the later Renaissance 
painters. And there are other poets or artists whose work has 
the power of appeal; the nameless charm and wistfulness of 
a thing not perfectly articulate, which means more than it can 
ever say, possesses more than it can ever impart, envisages more 
than it can ever define. It is the beauty of the ruin, suggesting 
the wonderful building that once was; of the unfinished statue, 
suggesting the splendour that should have been. 

Of course this conception must not be used as an excuse for 
bad workmanship. It is in the essence of the contract, so to 
speak, that this appeal to the imagination of others only begins 
to act when the artist himself has taken all the pains he can. It 
is only the intensity of his imaginative effort which kindles ours 
into action. And that intensity will, under normal circumstances, 
have made him work his best. Only it so happens that the 
greatest imaginings and desires of the human mind are beyond 
the greatest powers of words or paintings to utter, And the 
best artist, when he has used the very utmost of his skill, is left 
at last dependent on the sympathetic imagination of others. If 
that fails him, he dies with his meaning unexpressed. 

It is in this spirit of sympathetic imagination that we should 
read most ancient traditional books. And, as a matter of fact, 
we generally do so. They are all markedly imperfect, but we 
hardly notice the imperfections. How few of us, for instance, 
ever noticed that there were two different accounts of the Creation 
in Genesis before we were compelled? How few scholars were 
troubled by discrepancies between iad I and II? How little 
we resent the half-inarticulate quality of ancient vocabulary and 
syntax? Nay, weadmire them. For the best things that these 
books are trying to express are not to be reached by any correct 
human words. With all the knowledge in the world at our 
disposal, we must needs sooner or later throw ourselves on the sea 
of imaginative emotion in order to understand or express these 
greatnesses. And the reason why we are willing to do so in 
these cases, and not in others, is, I think, ultimately the intensity 

5.2 


260 THE RISE OF ‘THE GREEK EPIC x 


of the imagination behind. The driving of Jehu, the weeping 
face of Helen: these have behind them not the imagination of 
one great poet, but the accumulated emotion, one may almost say, 
of the many successive generations who have heard and learned 
and themselves afresh re-created the old majesty and loveliness. 
They are like the watchwords of great causes for which men 
have fought and died; charged with power from the first to 
attract men’s love, but now, through the infinite shining back of 
that love, grown to yet greater power. There is in them, as it 
were, the spiritual life-blood of a people. 


ΧΙ 
ΤΟΝ ΝΘ AT HCA 


THERE is a well-known list of the seven cities which claim to 
be the birthplace of Homer. There are always seven; but the 
names vary so that the actual claimants mentioned amount at 
least to ten. ‘Smyrna, Chios, Colophon, Salamis, Ios, Argos, 
Athenae’; but instead of ‘Ios’ we find ‘ Rhodos’ and ‘ Pylos’, 
instead of ‘Salamis’ sometimes ‘Ithake’. Now, without going 
into the rather transparent pretensions which have placed some 
of these cities on the list, we may notice two points. First, 
antiquity in general is quite agreed in regarding Homer as an 
Ionian, and it knew the poems only in the Ionian dialect. 
Secondly, the two cities which have, in the mere statement of the 
tradition, the strongest claim, are also the two of which we know 
that they were first Aeolic and only long after Homer's time 
Ionian: Smyrna and Chios.1. In both of these Homer was 
worshipped as a local hero. Thirdly, the two chief Ionian cities, 
Miletus and Ephesus, are never mentioned in the list of birth- 
places. That is to say, the chief Ionian birthplaces prove, on 
examination, to be not Ionian at all; and the tradition, even 
while it received and read its Homer in Ionian form, instinctively 
felt that the spirit of Ionian civilization at its ripest development 
was alien to the spirit of Homer. 

The traditional birthplace of Homer floats from Ithaca to 
Colophon. His date varies from 1159, given by some authorities 
quoted in Philostratus, to 686, the year assigned by the historian 


1 The evidences for Chios are: Pind. Mem. ii. 1, and Schol. (Ὁμηρίδαι) ; 
the Hymn to Apollo τυφλὸς ἀνήρ, οἰκεῖ δὲ Χίῳ ἐνὶ παιπαλοέσσῃ ; cf. Thuc. iil. 
104; Simonides, ἕν δὲ τὸ κάλλιστον Χῖος ἔειπεν ἀνήρ, meaning Homer and 
quoting //zad, Z 146; the anonymous Lzfe of Homer. For Smyrna: a local 
sanctuary (Ὁμήρειον) and statue; Strabo, p. 646; Cic. Aro Arch. 8; a native 
tradition which showed (and still shows to-day) the cave by the river Melés 
where Homer was born. See Proclus, Vzta Hom., and ‘Plut.’ Vita Hom., 
Paus. vii. 5. 6, and cf. the name Μελησιγένης. 


262 THE RISE “OF “THE "GREEK ἘΡΙῸ XI 


Theopompus. But he is never born in either of the two greatest 
Ionian cities at the time of their power. 


The rise of the Ionian civilization is in many ways the most 
wonderful phenomenon in Greek history; Every kind of intel- 
lectual advance seems to have its origin in Ionia. The greatest 
works of colonization and commerce, the first banks, the first 
maps, and the first effective Greek fleets come from there. The 
first prose! historian mentioned by tradition is ‘Cadmus of 
Miletus’; the first who has real substance and influence is 
Hecataeus of Miletus. The first Greek philosopher is Thales 
of Miletus, the second and third are Anaximander and Anaxi- 
menes of Miletus. Consider for a moment the strangeness of this 
figure of Thales. Before the end of the seventh century, while 
the Ionic portions of our /éad are still taking shape, Ionia 
seems to have been ringing with the fame of this new kind of 
great man, not a king nor a warrior, nor even an adventurous 
merchant prince, only a σοφὸς ἀνήρ, a wise man: a philosopher, 
who has quietly rejected all the myths about gods and theogonies ; 
an engineer, able to divert the river Halys from its course; 
a mathematician and an astronomer, able to predict the eclipse 
which occurred on May 28, 585 Β. Ὁ, And this man is not 
persecuted like Galileo or Priestley, not dependent on power- 
ful protection, like Leibnitz or Descartes. He is an acknow- 
ledged leader of his people, a man to consult in crises, when 
other nations performed a human sacrifice or took the inarticu- 
late and dangerous advice of a sacred snake. A generation 
or so later, about 540 B.C., just about the time when the Ziad 
and Odyssey were taken over to Athens to be recited at the 
great national festival, we meet another strange Ionian figure, 
a Colophonian this time. Xenophanes is a professional reciter 
of his own poetry, whose zeal fof the expurgation of ‘ Homer’ 
has become so great that he traverses Greece denouncing the 
falseness and immorality of the very poems from which his own 
performances were originally drawn. All the myths are false. 
There is only one God, infinite, all intellect, without bodily parts. 
Homer and Hesiod ‘tell lies, attributing to the gods all that 
among men is a shame and a rebuke, thievings and adulteries, 


1 See Radermacher in Phzlol. Wochenschrift, 1907, No. 10. 


XI THE RISE OF IONIA 263 


and deceivings one of another’. And another philosopher, not 
otherwise sympathetic to Xenophanes, remarks in passing that 
‘Homer and Hesiod ought to be whipped’. 

Now one must not suggest that the tone of these Philosophers 
represents the ordinary state of mind of the educated Ionian 
public. Thales and Xenophanes, and still more Heraclitus, were 
exceptional men. But the existence of an extreme view or 
a great advance of thought among a few people is nearly always 
good evidence for the prevalence of a more moderate view or 
a feebler advance among a much larger number. Before 
Xenophanes arose to denounce the moral atmosphere of the 
Epos altogether, there had probably been others improving that 
atmosphere from within. The spirit of expurgation, which we 
studied in the fifth lecture, had already begun its long work of 
removing the traces of primitive cruelty and brutishness from the 
heroes of Homer.! It could not make its work quite complete. 


1 The limits of date within which expurgation went on are hard to deter- 
mine. Some bold Paleian might argue that all the expurgation is a late 
Attic process, on these lines: (1) We find it still going on in the time of 
Zenodotus (see p. 124 note); (2) Attic tragedy, being early, mostly follows 
the unexpurgated versions of the sagas; (3) The argument below, that 
Aeschylus seems more primitive than Homer, may be interpreted as simply 
showing that Aeschylus was so, and that the ‘ Alexandrian’ treatment of the 
Gods in Homer really is Alexandrian—i.e. belongs in date to the fourth or 
third century, and that Zenodotus was right in considering the passages in 
which it occurs as spurious. To this we may answer: (1) Expurgation is a 
normal and constant process, always acting when the next teller or hearers 
of a story have any different standard of sensitiveness from the last. 
There is no reason it should stop until the text is fixed firm. We find as 
early as Xenophanes not only a spirit which must have produced expurgation, 
but a standard of ethical criticism so exceedingly high and severe that it can 
scarcely have been the first, or anything like the first, of its kind. I mean: 
before people got to complaining that Homer’s gods were in human shape, 
they must in all probability have complained of more obviously objectionable 
things. (2) This is important, but easily answered. Attic tragedy is in 
a different convention. It takes its legendary material comparatively un- 
expurgated because its characters are (comparatively) unidealized. Achilles 
can torture Hector in the 47ax or the Andromache, Odysseus and Agamem- 
non can slaughter Iphigenia in the Agamemnon or the [phigenia Taurica, 
because those heroes are not set up as models of chivalry; in many cases 
they are definitely meant to be ‘unsympathetic’, and within limits, the 
wickeder they are the better. The //¢ad, on the other hand, was the ‘ mirror 
of chivalry’, a recognized instrument of moral education because it repre- 
sented an idealized heroic age. Agamemnon in the //zud could not sacrifice 
Iphigenia, just as Tennyson’s King Arthur could not burn Guinevere alive 
or tear her between wild horses, whatever the old legends might say in 
either case. Such deeds would be out of the convention, and shocking. (3) 
The frivolous treatment of the gods in serious or romantic literature is a 
convention which probably, like much else, comes to Alexandria from Ionia. 


264 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC XI 


Yet if it had done for the gods what it did for the human beings 
there would not have been much ground left for the indignation 
of Xenophanes. 

But there seems to be always a limit to these processes of 
expurgation and reform from within. A progressive nation 
with a rich legendary tradition must from time to time wake up 
to look upon its legends with fresh eyes. They are regarded as 
something authoritative, unquestioned, indisputably edifying. 
And yet in them there are here and there details which seem 
hard to believe, harder still to admire. They are explained, 
allegorized, altered, expurgated. For the moment all is well. 
And then quickly there appears another crop of difficulties 
requiring the same treatment. The process is repeated. The 
amount of hard thinking and of emotion which mankind has 
again and again expended—perhaps wisely—in trying to patch 
the fragments of some great system of false beliefs, which often 
has nothing valuable about it except the emotion with which it 
happens to be regarded, is one of the most profoundly charac- 
teristic things in human history. It was widely prevalent in 
Greece, especially after the classical period. But a moment is 
apt to come, sooner or later, at which men begin to wonder 
whether after so much jettison there is really anything true to 
save, whether a bridge so extremely full of rotten planks is worth 
such repeated mending. The point at which thisstage is reached 
seems to depend on a certain proportion of qualities in the minds 
of the persons affected, the proportion between their critical 
intelligence and boldness on the one hand, and their reverence 
and depth of emotion on the other. Now Ionia in the sixth 
century was full of intelligence and daring ; it was adventurous, 
critical, scientific, rationalist, and self-confident. It was not, like 
Thrace, Crete, Athens, South Italy, a centre of religion or 
reactionary dreaming. It produced indeed some mysticism ; but 
a peculiar scientific and speculative mysticism of its own, more 
concerned with the properties of the Infinite (τὸ ἄπειρον) than 
with the traditional anthropomorphic gods.1 


(Aristophanes is of course quite different.) This subject is too large to 
discuss here. But we know that Zenodotus and Aristarchus regarded the 
frivolous scenes as ἀπρεπῆ; that is, they were #o¢ natural and suitable 
according to Alexandrian taste. 

1 See Schulz, Jonzsche Mystik. Also Die Gotterwelt Homers by Paul 
Meyer, Jahresber. iiber d. K. Klosterschule zu Iifeld, 1907. 


XI THE LIMITS OF EXPURGATION 265 


This scientific and critical temperament among the people of 
Ionia was met by a special weakness in the Homeric religion. 
It was not really religion at all. The beautiful Olympians whom 
we find in Homer forming a sort of divine family, and whom we 
know from statues, do not represent the Gods worshipped by 
any particular part of early Greece. They represent an en- 
lightened compromise made to suit the conveniences of a 
federation. Each local god had been shorn of his mystical or 
monstrous characteristics; of everything, that is, that was likely 
to give offence. And it is nearly always the mystical or monstrous 
elements of a belief which seem to have excited the keenest 
religious emotions of an ancient people. The owl Athena, the 
cow Hera, the snake-man Cecrops; the many ghosts and shapes 
of terror; the mystic bull Dionysus, who zs in some strange 
sense the beast which he himself tears to pieces alive, and from 
whose blood our souls are made: these things are cleared away 
from Homer’s world, or else humanized and made to tone in with 
his general serene anthropomorphism. This anthropomorphism 
happened to suit the art of sculpture, which became highly im- 
portant in Greece, and for that reason among others the Homeric 
gods have dominated the later tradition. But the real worship of 
Greece before the fourth century almost never attached itself to 
those luminous Olympian forms. There were many ecstasies of 
enthusiasm and outbreaks of superstition in Greece, but they 
all depend on deities of quite a different sort. There was 
enthusiasm for Orpheus and Dionysus: enthusiasm for the 
mysteries of the Mother and Maid at Eleusis. There was 
religious feeling about the local pre-Hellenic festivals, like the 
Thesmophoria. There was superstitious terror in Athens about 
the mutilation of the Hermae. But those Hermae were no 
images of the handsome young Homeric god; they represented 
the old divine boundary stone, whose unedifying form has been 
entirely expurgated from the Homeric epos. The failure of 
Nikias in his retreat from Syracuse was due to reverence for no 
Homeric Artemis, but for the ancient and unhumanized holiness of 
the Moon. Even the goddess who led Pisistratus back to Athens, 
Pisistratus τὸν “Ομηρικώτατον, was originally not so much the 
Homeric daughter of Zeus as the ancient pre-Homeric ‘ Athenaia 
Koré’. And the temple of Zeus, which the same Pisistratus, in the 


266 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC XI 


spirit of his Homeric policy, proceeded to build with so much 
pomp, was left all through the classical times unfinished. All the 
treasures of Athenian building went to Athena and Poseidon, 
the native Earth-Maiden and the native Sea. Of course Athens 
may have been a specially ‘ Pelasgian’ community: but #zfatzs 
mutandis the same observations could probably be made of any 
Greek town of which we possessed adequate records. 

One can see then what was likely to happen to the Homeric 
gods. They had been made, up to a certain standard, very 
beautiful, highly anthropomorphic, not in the least poverty- 
stricken, barbarous, or grotesque. But in the process they 
had lost their special hold on the worship of any particular 
community. They had forfeited the powerful support of un- 
critical local superstition: and, after all, in the eyes of an 
educated and sceptical Ionian, would they quite bear thinking 
about? This serio-comic Olympian family, with its permanent 
feud between the husband and wife, in behalf of which we can 
but lamely plead that the wife’s unamiability is the natural 
result of the husband's extreme unfaithfulness, and the husband’s 
unfaithfulness almost excused by the wife’s monstrous unamia- 
bility? The lame son at whom the other gods laugh? The 
pretty daughter, always in scrapes and tears? To a reverent 
spirit these things can be allegorized. To a scientific historian 
they possess an historical origin and explanation. But to the 
critical Ionian, whose eyes are no longer blinded by the sacred 
past, who patronizes while he loves, they tended to take a curious 
form. It is a form hard to characterize or to understand, unless 
perhaps it is an imitation by the taste of a refined and sceptical 
age of the simple-minded burlesque of sacred things which is 
often found in primitive ‘ages of faith’: the form which reaches 
its highest, or perhaps I should say its lowest, point in Ovid, or 
before Ovid in the Alexandrians. The gods are not by any 
means rejected. They are patronized, conventionalized, and 
treated as material for ornament. Their traditional character- 
istics, roughly speaking, are preserved; Zeus is royal, and 
Apollo is musical, and Athena is a warrior or a spinster: and 
the late Ionian poets believe in them not much more effectively 
than Pope believed in the sylphs who tire his heroine’s hair in 
the Rape of the Lock. There is a depth of unbelief profounder 


XI COLLAPSE OF HOMERIC THEOLOGY 267 


than any outspoken denial. Pope would not have troubled to 
deny the existence of sylphs. When you take the gods in such 
a spirit as this it is not worth while to furbish up their moral 
characters. They are more amusing as they stand; they may 
even be, in a certain external and shallow sense, more beautiful. 

I think that in this matter of the Homeric or Olympian gods 
one can notice three distinct stages. There is a primitive stage, 
represented best by the earliest strata of Hesiod’s 7heogony: 
a stage in which, for one thing, men did not use their critical 
faculties at all on this sort of material, and, for another, a great 
many of the myths which afterwards became shocking or ridicu- 
lous still preserved some remnant of their original meanings. 
At such a time, for instance, the quarrels between Zeus and 
Hera may still have been felt consciously as part of the old and 
respectable feud between the conquered native goddess and the 
invading patriarchal god.! Secondly, there is a long middle 
Stage of expurgation, of rejection, of humanizing. When it 
began we can hardly guess, nor how the expurgations gradually 
came to be accepted and canonized in the official texts; but the 
process must, in some form or other, have lasted through a great 
part of the life of the poems. Thirdly, there is the late Ionian 
stage of which we have just spoken, in which the Olympians have 
ceased to have any genuinely religious significance, but serve to 
provide expedients to the story-teller, and afford material for a 
kind of half-licentious humour. 

Presently, I think, we shall see reason to add a fourth stage, 
that of the acceptance of the Homeric system by non-Ionian 
Greece, a stage in which the more primitive Greek communities, 
beginning to feel uneasiness at the muddle and crudity of their 
own local superstitions, receive with reverence and enthusiasm 
the comparatively orderly and civilized system of Homer. In 
the sixth century, when Ionian culture spread in a great wave 
to the mainland of Greece, Ionia was probably already d/asde 
to the theology of which she was the chief centre. And the 
Zeus whom Aeschylus accepted from Ionia and Homer was a 
widely different being from the Zeus of whom the men of Miletus 
made merry tales. 


11. E. Harrison, Primer of Greek Religion. 


268 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC XI 


At the very outset of that interesting branch of literature 
which culminated in the Greek Novel, we hear of the Milesian 
Stories. Light tales they seem to have been, much in the style 
of Boccaccio. A typical one is the tale of the inconsolable 
widow of Ephesus, who used constantly to frequent her hus- 
band’s tomb—from mixed motives; partly from devotion to his 
memory, partly because there was a fascinating young soldier on 
guard there. The first collector of such stories whose name is 
known to us, Aristides, belongs to an uncertain but much later 
date. But two or three tales in Herodotus bear the same stamp: 
among them some, like that of the wife of Candaules, which were 
certainly not first told by Herodotus. And besides, the very fact 
that Aristides called his collection ‘ Milesian Stories’ seems to 
mean that the type of story was already recognized as Milesian. 
It was a name like ‘Contes gaulois’. And I think one can 
see this spirit, a mocking, half-licentious, Boccaccio-like spirit, 
already at work in the later, and not the very latest, parts of 
the had. 

We will take two detailed instances. But first, let us be clear 
about the issue. As we have seen before, the human beings in 
Homer always maintain their dignity and self-respect. No hero 
is a liar’ or a coward. None is drunken or loose-lived or 
vicious. None tortures his enemy. But the gods: that is quite 
a different matter. They are capable of anything. They not 
only practise torture—the gods of most nations have had a 
weakness in that direction—but they lose their dignity. They 
are cheated, beaten, imprisoned. They lie and are found out. 
They are routed by human beings. They howl when wounded. 
Their father ‘bangs’ them ‘about the house’. That, you may 
say, is characteristic of all simple and primitive religions. Does 
not Ouranos swallow his children and again vomit them up? 
Does not the Babylonian Apsu, in the primaeval chaos, cut his 
wife Tiamat in two, to make one half of her into heaven and the 
other into earth? Yes. Those are simple and savage stories, 
visibly allegorical, dependent in part on the mere helplessness 
of primitive language. The Homeric passages in question are 

* Of course a disguised hero in the course of a dangerous adventure tells 


the necessary lies to avoid detection. That is in the essence of all romances 
of adventure. 


XI THE MILESIAN SPIRIT 269 


totally different from that. They are not primitive, but smooth 
and sophisticated. They mock with easy scepticism at the 
indecorousness of the primitive beliefs. 


But let us take our two instances. There was in Greece a 
widespread tradition of the Wars of the Gods. Zeus somehow 
holds his power by conquest over other beings, vaguer, older, 
and darker shapes, belonging to some old order, or, perhaps, to 
the chaos that preceded all order. We hear of many treatments 
in early epic of the Titanomachia, Theomachia, Gigantomachia. 
And in our Hesiodic collection we have preserved, imperfectly 
and with many repetitions, due apparently to a conflation of two 
sources, a long fragment of a Titanomachia. It tells how Zeus 
gained the victory over the Titans by freeing and calling to his 
aid certain primitive beings whom the Titans and Ouranos had 


oppressed (7%eog. 617 ff.).7 


Briareds and Kottos and Gués, their father Ouranos con- 
ceived hatred of them in his heart, being afraid at their wild 
valour and their looks and tallness, and he bound them in 
bondage deep beneath the wide-wayed earth. And there 
they dwelt in anguish under the ground at the ends of the 
great world, seated on the verge of things, a very long time, 
amazed and with great mourning in their hearts. But Zeus 
and the immortal gods, by the counsel of Earth, brought 
them again to the light. 

Zeus asked them to help him in the long war against the Titans, 
and they consented. The gods stood on Olympus and the 
Titans upon Othrys; and they had fought already for ten years. 
So they joined battle: 


And the Titans opposite had made strong their lines, and 
both sides put forth their might. And there was a terrible 
cry from the boundless sea, and shattering of the earth, and 
the broad sky groaned, and high Olympus was shaken from 
his foundations with the rush of immortal things: and the 
quaking and the noise of feet upon the steeps came down 
unto cloudy Tartarus.... And the armies met with a great 
shout, and Zeus held back his fury no more. Down from 
Olympus and heaven he came in one sweep of thunders 


1 If Briareos is a fifty-oared ship, as seems likely, he must have been 
introduced later into this story. But perhaps the Fifty-oar was rather identi- 
fied with an already existing Briareos, and thus Briareos identified with 
Aigaion, 


270 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC XI 


that ceased not: and the bolts went winged from his mighty 
hand, and the life-bearing Earth cracked with the burning, 
and around him the fathomless forest roared in fire... . And 
foremost in that bitter stirring of battle were Kottos and 
Briareds and Gués, unsated of war, who cast from their 
hands three hundred great stones, one on another, and 
darkened the Titans with their castings, and drave them 
down and bound them in bitter bondage, for all their pride, 
as far beneath the earth as the sky is above the earth. For 
a bronzen anvil cast from heaven would fall nine nights and 
days, and on the tenth night would come to the earth. And 
from earth a bronzen anvil would fall nine nights and days, 
and on the tenth night would come to cloudy Tartarus: 
whereabout there is driven a bronzen fence, and around it 
Night is shed, Night in three floods. And over it the roots 
are planted of the earth and the unharvested sea. 


Now the exact merit of this as poetry may be a matter of 
dispute. It may be a little incompetent, a little bombastic. But 
it is at least genuine and reverent. If we are to describe these 
primitive battles of gods, that is the kind of way in which to 
conceive them. 

Now turn to the battle of the gods in a late part of the Z#ad 
( 301 ff.): 


It was shield-piercing Ares who began, and sprang upon 
Athena with his bronzen spear, and uttered a word of insult : 
‘ Wherefore again, thou dog-fly, dost drive the gods to strife ? 
Rememberest not the day when thou didst let loose Diomedes 
to wound me, and thyself in sight of all didst grasp the spear 
and drive full at me and tear my fair flesh? Now I warrant 
me thou shalt pay for all thy doings!’ So saying he made 
a lunge at her aegis tasselled and terrible, which not the 
thunder of Zeus can make to fall. There bloody Ares lunged 
with his long spear. But she started back and caught up in 
her stout hand a stone lying upon the plain, a big black 
jagged stone, which men of old had put to be the boundary 
of a field; and she hit Ares on the neck with it, and his 
limbs gave way. He reached over seven furlongs as he fell, 
and his hair was filled with dust and his arms rattled about 
him. And Pallas Athena laughed aloud, and boasted over 
him with winged words. ‘Fool, hast thou not learned yet 
how far I am thy better, that thou wilt dare to match thy 
strength with mine? That is the way to fulfil thy mother’s 
curses, who plans anger and mischief against thee for desert- 
ing the Greeks.’ 


XI IEPOS TAMOS 271 


Presently Aphrodite, who was in love with Ares, came and 
took him by the arm to help him up, while he made a great 
groaning, and began gradually to come to. Hera saw, and 
called to Athena: 

‘Here is that dog-fly —the poet has an affection for that 
word—‘ coming to help Ares. Chase her!’ So Athena, 
rejoicing in her heart, flew at Aphrodite, and drove her in 
the chest with her stout hand, and her limbs and her dear 
heart gave way beneath her. And there the two of them 
lay together on the many-nurturing Earth. 

Later on, towards the end of the battle, Artemis is facing 
Hera: 

To her in wrath spake the reverend spouse of Zeus: 
‘What seekest thou, shameless she-dog, standing against 
me?’...Sospake she, and with her left hand gripped both 
the hands of Artemis by the wrist, while with her right she 
took the bow and arrows off her shoulders; then with the 
bow and arrows whipped her about the ears, and laughed as 
she dipped her head this way and that. And the arrows 
kept dropping from the quiver. And the goddess full of 
tears fled like a wood-pigeon. 


‘One of the few passages in the “ας, says Dr Leaf, ‘ which 
can be pronounced poetically bad.’ True, yet the badness lies 
entirely in the taste, not in the execution. The verses are 
admirably written, incomparably better than those of Hesiod’s 
Titanomachia. But the poet was not writing about anything 
that he felt as real or as mattering much to anybody’s feelings. 
He was almost writing parody or mock-epic. And he made it 
quite pretty ! 


Let us take another instance. Among the old traditional 
subjects of semi-religious Epos was one which our extant remains 
of Greek literature leave rather obscure, the mystic marriage of 
Zeus and Hera. This may have been in its origin a sort of 
marriage of Heaven and Earth, or of the two greatest divine 
beings, from which all things arise. It may conceivably have 
symbolized the union of the two races and two religions—the 
patriarchal Zeus of the Northerners, being united with Hera, the 
Argive Koré. It may have been one of those naive recognitions 
of the mystery and divinity of the processes of life, which often 


272 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC XI 


shed such high dignity upon the external grossness of primitive 
religion. Whatever its origin, it was a subject treated by divers 
poets with reverence and mystery, as we can tell by the allusions 
in Pindar, Aeschylus, and Euripides. 

Now, how is this subject treated in the Fourteenth Book of 
the Τα) Absolutely in the spirit of Boccaccio: I might almost 
say, of a Palais Royal farce. The passage is sometimes much 
praised, and is certainly admirably written: ‘radiant with 
humour, grace, and healthful sensuousness,’ is the criticism of 
Dr. Leaf. But what is the story? Its name is almost enough: 
it is called by ancient writers The Tricking of Zeus. 

The father of gods and men was sitting on the top of many- 
fountained Ida, watching the war. The gods had offended him 
by giving secret help to the Greeks, and he had arranged that 
the Trojans should win the present battle. So he went himself 
to sit on Mount Ida, and see that all proceeded as he desired. 
His wife Hera, a partisan of the Greeks, saw him sitting there— 
στυγερὸς δέ of ἔπλετο θυμῷ--- and thought how much she disliked 
him!’ She determined to outwit her lord and master. So she 
went to her room, washed, anointed, and scented herself, and 
put on her best immortal raiment, including ear-rings with three 
stones in them. Next she went to Aphrodite and begged for 
the loan of her Cestus, or embroidered girdle, which acted as a 
love-charm. She explained—falsely, of course—how she wished 
it in order to reconcile an old married couple dwelling at the 
end of the world, who had unfortunately quarrelled—Okeanos 
and mother Tethys, in fact. Having obtained the Cestus, she 
proceeds to find the Spirit of Sleep, and with some difficulty 
bribes him to come and be ready to charm the eyes of Zeus at a 
critical moment. The bribe has to be high, since Sleep had 
done her the same service once before, in the old Heracéleza, and 
had suffered in consequence. Finally, she repairs to Mount Ida, 
to ask in most dutiful language the permission of Zeus to make 
her expedition to Okeanos and mother Tethys. She does not 
like to go so far without her lord’s approval. Remember that 
all this edifying story began by her thinking how much she dis- 
liked Zeus! I can find no dignified word to describe adequately 
her provocative conduct towards her victim. However, she 
succeeds in entirely engrossing his attention, and so rouses his 


XI FROM EPOS TO TRAGEDY 273 


passionate admiration that he compares her favourably with no 
less than seven other females towards whom he has entertained 
similar feelings. He quite forgets the war. He goes to sleep 
in her arms. And Hera sends a message to her allies that they 
can do what they like now: Zeus is safe! 

Now, were I required to subscribe half a crown to save 
Aristides of Miletus and all his children from everlasting death, 
I do not say that I would outright refuse. In its own place 
this kind of literature has a certairr value, and seems to have 
served as a stimulus to better work in others. But not all the 
riches of Egyptian Thebes could, I think, ever atone for the 
injury done to the human race by the invasion of this Milesian 
spirit into what is perhaps the greatest poem of the greatest 
nation of poets that the world has known. It has defiled its own 
beautiful world. It has ‘slain the image of God, as it were, in 
the eye’. For the poets who actually wrote these passages there 
is a great excuse. Their cause was, perhaps, on the whole, 
rather a good cause than a bad. But historical circumstances 
combined to catch and stereotype the epic at the moment when, 
perhaps just after the zenith of its glory, it had caught this 
mocking infection. Rightly sceptical towards the authorized 
gods and their legends, it had not the serious courage simply to 
seek truth and reject falsehood in what are generally regarded 
as the highest regions of human thinking. It neither denied its 
gods nor remade them. It degraded them further, and used 
them for ornament and amusement, to make a good tale the 
merrier. I had almost written, to make a good tale into a bad 
one. When once this infection has crept into its blood, the Epos 
as a form of living and growing poetry was doomed. 

Consider what that meant for the history of Greek literature. 
Greek literature starts from an immense wealth of Saga traditions, 
and the need of an instrument for expressing them ; to meet that 
need it created the Epos. It had been a costly and a rare 
creation; a metre, a style, a whole language almost. And now 
that part of the Greek people which had done all this for the sake of 
the Saga had outgrown the Saga, and was beginning to parody 
what it had formerly adored.!. Had Ionia been the whole of 


1 Monro allows quite a large place to the mock-heroic in the second part 
of the Odyssey, Telemachus’ sneeze which σμερδαλέον κονάβησε (p 542), the 


2760 T 


274 THE RISE OF THE "GREER EPIC XI 


Greece, not only the Epos, but the whole heroic tradition, might 
have died during the sixth and fifth centuries. But Ionia was 
not. the whole of Greece, and the Saga found a new utterance in 
Attic tragedy. 


I always hesitate to use the antithesis of northern and native, 


or Hellenic and pre-Hellenic, as applied to the whole of any con- 
crete fact. The rule is that everywhere you find northern and 
native elements, but nowhere do you find a purely northern or 
purely native community. Yet in contrasting the Epos with 
tragedy that antithesis cannot but occur to one’s mind. 

When the ancestors of the Aeolians and Ionians fled across the 
seas—a mixed set of races, often under Achaean leaders—they 
were compelled, as we observed in the second lecture, to leave 
behind them their sacred places, most of their tribal and family 
institutions, and notably the graves of their fathers. The prestige 
of the Achaean chiefs, the partial return to migratory life, the 
convenience of the Northern institutions of the Saga and the 
Bard, combined to give to the Epos its prevailing Achaean tone. 
But on the mainland of Greece during all this time, even where 
the northern occupations were most tyrannous, there remained 
always some fragments of the old population, peasants and serfs 
and outlaws for the most part, who still clung to their old 
objects of worship, their Earth-Maidens and their harvest magic, 
especially their tribal initiations and their sacred tombs. A 
downtrodden people they must have been for many generations, 
worshipping by stealth and in fear. But as the populations 
became more mixed, which was the case everywhere on the 
mainland, the result was that the old pre-Hellenic stratum of beliefs 
and emotions re-emerged. How the initiation rites led to the 
formation of an initiation-god Dionysus, the Zeus-Child who 
pigsty described in language borrowed from Priam’s palace (ξ 13 ff), the 


πότνια μήτηρ of the beggar Irus (σ 5), &c. He gives some fifteen alleged in- 
stances in the index under ‘Parody’. Miilder goes much further, QOued//en, 
pp. 287 ff, 347 ff 

Exactly the same spirit occurs in the Pélerinage de Charlemagne, which, 
however, belongs to a quite early and good period. See G. Paris, Poésie du 
M. A., i. pp. 119-49. It can be shown on other grounds to be connected 
with the neighbourhood of Paris (e.g. it mentions no towns except St. Denys, 
Paris, Chartres, and Chateaudun, with no word of Aix or Laon), and the critic 
regards its heroi-comic character as ‘le plus ancien produit de l’esprit parisien’. 
Perhaps the Demodocus lay, which looks exceedingly ancient, occupies the 
same place in ‘l’esprit milésien’. 


XI PRE-HOMERIC SAGA IN AESCHYLUS 275 


died and rose again, the God who showed the candidates for 
initiation to their dead ancestors and led his rout of masked and 
dancing ghosts; how this worship of Dionysus, combined with 
the old custom of performing rites round the tomb of a dead 
hero, narrating his deeds and sufferings and invoking his return 
to his people: that story is too long and intricate to attempt 
here. In even the latest works of Attic tragedy the Masquers of 
Dionysus are rarely dissociated from some sacred tomb. In this 
severe, earnest, keenly emotional atmosphere, touched with 
mysticism by the shadow of present death, the Greeks of the 
mainland kept up in their separate cities and villages their own 
local fragments of the heroic saga. 

Now about this time of the decay of the Epos, Athens had 
thrown off her ages: of Pelasgian slumber and was just coming 
into intimate contact with Ionia. To her young and groping 
genius the high civilization and intelligence of Ionia, the magnifi- 
cent form of the Epos, the broad sweep of Homeric pan-Hellen- 
ism, the clean and lordly northern spirit, came as a world of 
inspiration, and quickened the ancient ceremonials of worship at 
the tomb to the splendid growth of Attic Tragedy. 

Turn from that late Homeric story of the 7vzcking of Zeus 
to the earliest, crudest, most incompetent tragedy which we 
possess, though, in its way, one of the most beautiful, the 
Suppliant Women of Aeschylus. It is not only that there is 
a marked change of atmosphere, but it seems like a change 
backward, not forward, towards an older, a simpler and a 
grander, world. The very first words of the play strike a key- 
note: Ζεὺς μὲν ἀφίκτωρ, ‘Zeus the Suppliant’. Would any of 
those clear-headed Homeric bards have ventured on that ancient 
phrase? They knew of a Zeus who, on a far-off mountain 
throne, observed and avenged suppliants. But this Zeus of 
Aeschylus is himself the suppliant ; the prayer which you reject 
is his very prayer, and in turning from your door the helpless or 
the outcast you have turned away the most high God. The 
belief was immemorially old.!_ It was doubtless in a thousand of 

1 The discovery of the Hymn of the Kouretes enables us exactly to under- 
stand Ζεὺς ’Adixrap. He is a ‘projection’ of the rite of Supplication; a 
conception generated from the band of human suppliants just as Zeus Kouros, 


or simply 6 Μέγιστος Kodpos, is generated from the band of Kouroi, Silenus 
from the Silenoi, Pan from the Panes, or, a very clear case, Amphictyon from 


ἜΣ ΖΦ 


276 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC XI 


its ramifications foolish and absurd. And the Ionic Epos had 
made all its beliefs sensible. 

I will venture to read you a strange Aeschylean lyric about 
a deed of this same Zeus. It is a story far too primitive and 
monstrous for Homer: the tale of Io, the Argive maiden beloved 
of Zeus, who was turned into a cow, forsooth, and watched by 
- the hundred-eyed Argos, and driven over the world by a gad- 
ἢν! A cow-shaped, or even a cow-headed, maiden! And a 
cow-headed maiden beloved by Zeus! To a cultivated Ionian 
such conceptions must have belonged to the very lowest regions 
of ‘Pelasgian’ folly. They had been expurgated from Homer 
generations before. Yet out of that unpromising material 
Aeschylus extracts something which is not only genuine reli- 
gious thought, but, to my feeling, even somewhat sublime 
thought. The love of Zeus leads its object through unearthly 
shame and suffering to a strange and overwhelming reward. 
We cannot understand. But Zeus is bound by no law but his 
own supreme will. He has always his own great purpose, and 
he moves towards it by inscrutable ways. 

I should explain that to the mythologist Io is probably one of 
the many shapes of the horned Moon, the wanderer of the sky. 
She was identified by the Greeks with the Egyptian Isis, and her 
son—conceived miraculously by the touch of the hand of Zeus— 
with Apis, the sacred Egyptian bull. The speakers are the 
daughters of Danaus, descendants of Io, returned to her native 
land, Argos, and praying protection from their pursuers, the sons 
of Aegyptus (Swpp/. 524 ff.) : 

Lord of lords, blessed among the blessed, of perfections 
most perfect strength, O happy Zeus, hear us, and let it be! 
Shield us from the pride of man, whom thou righteously 
abhorrest, and whelm in the dark-blue deep our black 
prison-house.! Look upon the woman’s cause; look on 
the race born of old from the woman whom thou didst love, 
and make new the joyous tale. Be a rememberer of many 
things, O thou whose hand was laid on Io. Lo, we are 
aS born of thy race, though sent from this land to dwell 
afar. 

I walk again in the print of ancient feet, where our 


the Amphictyones. See references on p. 76, note. ‘Le dieu est le désir 
(collectif) personnifié,’ Doutté, WZagie de 7Afrigue du Nord, p. 601. 
1 je. the ship of their pursuers. 


XI THE MYSTERY OF IO 277 


mother was watched, moving among the flowers; the 
meadow of kine, whence Io fled, sea-tossed by a burning 
pain, knowing not her desire, to pass through many tribes 
OU MER, ὁ ὅς 


Her wide wanderings are then described, across the Helles- 
pont, through Asia southwards, till she reaches at last ‘ the all- 
pasturing garden of Zeus, the snow-fed meadow visited by the 
whirling giant of the desert-sand, and the water of Nile un- 
touched by sickness’. 

Do you observe how deeply and simply serious it all is? 
Aeschylus accepts the whole story. But because he is simple- 
minded and great-minded, and has not a grain of lewdness 
anywhere in him, this old, barbarous, pre-anthropomorphic 
superstition has become to him a great and strange thing; and 
the spirit passes from the poet himself to his reader. He throws 
no veil over the cow-shaped heroine. The transformation is 
part of the mystery, and he emphasizes it. The poem continues: 


And men that had then their habitation in the land, their 
hearts were shaken with fear at the strange sight, a Being 
agonized half-human, part of the race of kine and part of 
woman. They marvelled at the mystery. Who was it that 
brought her peace in the end, her the far-wandering, the 
afflicted, the gadfly-goaded Io? 

He who ruleth through ages of unresting life, Zeus [to 
whom years are as yesterday]. The unwounding strength 
of a hand, the breath of a god, gave rest to her, and her 
heart flowed in a sad tenderness of tears. The word of true 
promise became a divine seed within her, and she bore a 
blameless child, through ages long perfect in happiness. 

Whom of gods shall I praise for works more justified ? 
Father, planter of the garden, worker with the hand, and 
Lord, thinker of ancient thought, great builder of our race, 
Zeus, whose breath maketh all accomplishment! 

He hasteth not at the command of another. Being 
stronger than all, he maketh great the weak. None sitteth 
above him, and he honoureth none. And the deed and the 
word are present as one thing, to dispatch that end whereto 
the counselling mind moveth. 


The story which Homer rejected has become the vehicle of a 
theology higher than Homer's, or, if not higher, at least based on 
deeper thought and involving the reconciliation of vaster conflicts. 
The mind of Aeschylus was possessed by one of the problems, 


278 THE RISE OF ‘THE GREEK EPIC ΧΙ 


perhaps the most dreadful problem, of human evolution. He 
sees the higher asserting itself gradually over the lower in the 
process of years; but he sees also, what many people blind their 
eyes against, that the so-called higher often achieves its end at 
the price of becoming something more evil than the wild beasts. 
It is good that the white man should supersede the red and the 
brown; but what things the white men have done in the process! 
For Aeschylus the contest was probably present in two forms: 
a conflict, externally, of Greek against barbarian, and in Greece 
itself, of what we may call Achaean or Olympian against 
‘Pelasgian’. Zeus was in each case the spirit of the higher 
power; and, to Aeschylus, probably, if anything on earth 
specially typified Zeus, the new conqueror and orderer of heaven, 
it was the new Dominion of the Athenian Empire. 

It was unlike a Homeric bard to have such thoughts at all. 
It is still more unlike him to express them in the language of 
the Saga. He was a trained artist, and would not dream of so 
violating his convention. He kept his poetry in one compart- 
ment; his speculation, if he had any, in another. But for 
Aeschylus they are both one. Two of Aeschylus’ earliest 
trilogies seem to deal explicitly with this subject. Both trilogies 
are represented to us by one play each, the Supphant Women 
and the Prometheus. In the two isolated plays which remain, 
the sympathy is entirely on the side of the weaker: it is for the 
suppliant women against their pursuers, and for Prometheus 
against Zeus. Yet we know from other sources that in the com- 
plete trilogy the ultimate judgement was for the stronger, so 
soon as the stronger would consent to merge his strength in love. 
The story of Io is prominent in both plays. It is only loosely 
connected with the main plot, but it typifies in each case the 
religious meaning of the whole. Zeus did to Io what seemed 
like monstrous wrong’; professing to love her, he afflicted her 
and ceased not, and the end was that he brought her to a 
perfect joy which—so she is perhaps at the end willing to 
believe—could not be attained otherwise. And even while 
Prometheus and Io are mingling their griefs against Zeus, it is 
shown that a child descended from Io is to be also the deliverer 
of Prometheus (Prom, 772, 871 ff.). That too is part of Zeus’ 
purpose. 


XI THE. GIFT? OP “ATHENS 279 


We know Shelley’s magnificent treatment of the Prometheus 
Saga. Shelley was too passionate a friend of the oppressed 
ever to make terms with a successful tyrant, be he man or god. 
In Shelley’s Prometheus Unbound the prophesied catastrophe 
which is to hurl Zeus from his throne actually occurs, and the 
tormented Universe, awakening to a life of peace and love, finds 
uncontrolled that inward perfection of order which leaves no 
place for external government. But in Aeschylus we know that 
the end was different. Zeus the all-ruler must always rule. 
Does not each one of us know, as a matter of fact, that Zeus and 
not Prometheus is now governing the world? But Zeus, who 
came to his throne by violence,! learns as the ages pass that 
violence is evil. For all his wisdom he grows wiser still. Nay, 
it seems that even from the beginning, in his cruelty to Prome- 
theus, as in his cruelty to Io, he had a great purpose in the 
depth of his mind, and that purpose was peace. Prometheus is 
unbound, not by a turning of the tide of war, but by the atone- 
ment, after ages of pain, after the suffering by which alone 
wisdom is born, of a noble rebel and a noble ruler. The Zeus 
who could be himself a suppliant, who even in the most ancient 
legends forgave and set free his conquered ‘Titans, was capable of 
this crowning strength also. Ido not suggest that this solution is 
ultimately tenable or satisfying. But it at least represents intense 
thought, and thought naturally expressing itself in the medium of 
poetry. Itis just this which Ionia never gave us. It is peculiarly 
the gift of Athens. 


We have tried to follow, in a very imperfect and sometimes 
inconsequent manner, the life of Traditional Epic Poetry in 
Greece. We have seen the first fragments of what was after- 
wards the Greek race gathering behind their bare walls on 
islands and desert capes in the Aegean; we have caught glimpses 
of ancient and diverse memories of tribal history, of great deeds, 
of rich palaces and mysterious kings, meeting and parting and 
re-joining again into the numerous heroic poems now lost, and 
the two, more highly wrought than the others, which still survive. 
We have noted how, of these two poems, one again was more 
‘Homeric’ than its companion; more carefully purified and 


1 Cf. Verrall on Ag. 192 ff. 


280 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC XI 


expurgated, more tensely knit and gorgeously worded, while at 
the same time the heroic and ancient atmosphere was more 
sedulously protected from the breaths of commoner or more 
recent life. We have looked as best we could, much helped by 
Hebrew parallels, into the strange processes of growth and com- 
position which have made the //ad what it is, and have tried to 
analyse some part of its poetical greatness. Lastly, we have seen 
how the races which built up ‘ Homer’ at length outgrew him, 
and found other subjects than the Heroic Saga in which to express 
their ideals and satisfy their intellectual thirst. Homer did not 
die ; on the contrary his greatest fame, his most secure enthrone- 
ment among poets, was still before him. We shall see in the 
next chapter something of what Athens did for Homer, and shall 
perhaps be forced to recognize that the text which we possess is 
not a thing of pre-Pisistratid, almost pre-Ionian, antiquity, but 
actually, as a text, less ancient than the 4 gamemnon or even 
the Bacchae. But whatever work Athens may have done for 
the Ziad and Odyssey it is extraordinary how strictly she kept 
up the old Homeric convention, the old language, the old manner, 
the old subjects and rules of thought. The preservation of the 
Ionic Epos in Athens throughout the fifth century is a cardinal 
instance of that sensitiveness to style and tradition which is one 
of the deepest characteristics of all Greek art. But, after all, it 
was tradition rather than creation: when we seek the great 
creative work of the fifth century we find it in other paths, with 
which Ionia has little to do.! 

We have moved into a sterner land, more interested in truth 
and less in romance; into a language less beautiful, more 
intellectual, more highly differentiated; a language which has 
elements of hard prose mixed with its poetry, and has lost that 
splendid and careless gleam by means of which Homer was 
accustomed to set all themes in the world aglow. Homer’s 
poetry was so easy, the sympathy was so clear, the imagination 
was roused so instinctively, that we must leave it with a sigh. 
And this new poetry is of a kind which will not yield its 

1 Professor Wheeler of Columbia University calls to my notice the very 
similar contrast between the mocking boisterousness of the Ionic vase- 
paintings and the severity of the early Attic. See also Mr. Cornford’s 


remarks in 7hucydides Mythistoricus on the difference between the Ionic 
Herodotus and the Attic Thucydides. 


XI THE GIFT OF ATHENS 281 


treasures without hard thinking, without somewhat intense and 
vigilant use of the imagination. The poets, for the most part, 
are no longer merely singing to please us, according to methods 
which have been tried for generations and proved effectual. 
They are men not exactly less cultured—intellectually they are 
far greater—than the Ionian bards; but they are less accom- 
plished. They are imaginatively nearer to the primitive earth- 
born tangle of desires and wonders. Their feet are set in places 
lower than Homer’s feet ; their thoughts strive towards heights 
and obscurities which his poetry dared not penetrate. They 
have fought at Marathon, and their hands are reshaping the 
world. The bitterness of truth is mingled with their dreams of 
beauty; the passion of men searching gleams through the 
stiffness of their majestic conventions. Conquerors of the Mede; 
builders of free Athens ; first makers to the world of tragedy and 
of comedy: it is a rare combination. 

But there begins the second great chapter in Greek literature. 


XII 
THE TEXT OP OM iis 


FROM KNOWN ΤῸ UNKNOWN 


THE main exposition of this book has proceeded in historical 
order, starting in times of extreme darkness and working slowly 
towards the beginnings of clear and well-lit history. Of 
necessity, therefore, the argument has rested cheifly on analogies 
and general considerations, not on documents: it has had to be 
very cautious, aiming at probability, not certainty, constantly 
suggesting, not professing to demonstrate. It will, I think, be 
convenient now, at the end of the book, to reverse this process, 
and trace briefly such actual recorded facts as we possess about 
the history of the poems backward from the known to the 
unknown. The two inquiries will just meet in the middle. I 
have hopes that this chapter, if not very inspiring to the general 
reader, may be of some use to students, helping them perhaps to 
clarify their conceptions of the whole Homeric problem and free 
their minds from the fatal glamour of false knowledge diffused by 
the printed text.1 

We start from what we may call the modern vulgate, that is, 
the text as ordinarily printed at the present day apart from the 
special views of any particular editor. This text is remarkably 
uniform, almost as much so as that of Vergil, far more so than 
that of Shakespeare. Also it is based upon an extremely large 
number of MSS. True, no complete copy is older than the 
tenth century A.D., but there are large fragments much earlier, 
and indirect evidence carries the Vulgate back a little before the 
Christian era. 


1 For good remarks on the habits of ancient scholars in dealing with their 
books, and the remains of fluidity even in the mediaeval MSS. of Homer, see 
a i Allen, Zhe Text of the Odyssey, Papers of British School of Rome, V 

1910). 


ἢ, 


XII ZENODOTUS AND ARISTARCHUS 283 


We also find in the Scholia, or ancient commentaries, a great 
deal of information about the texts published or approved by 
certain Alexandrian scholars, especially Aristarchus (fl. 160 B. C.) 
and Zenodotus (fl. 285 B. C.). It would almost be possible, from 
the statements of the Scholia, to reconstitute the whole text 
according to Aristarchus, and Dr. Roemer at one time promised 
to doso. For Zenodotus our knowledge is not nearly so full, 
but we can make out much about his critical method. 

It is significant that these two critics invented for their editions 
certain special signs. Zenodotus apparently used only one, the 
obelus (—), to mark lines as spurious. Of Aristarchus’s signs 
the two commonest are, first the obelus, then the diplé (>), which 
is merely a mark for reference like our asterisk. Other signs 
denoted that lines were repeated more than once in the poems, 
and that in some places they were right, in others wrong. 
Others probably showed where the genuine Homer left off and 
where he began again, the part in between, as far as we can 
make out, being spurious. Aristarchus had also one sign which 
meant that he was referring to a note already made by 
Zenodotus. 

When you think of the pressing need there was, according to 
our ideas, for the invention of a decent punctuation and proper 
divisions between words, it becomes the more striking that the 
first need these scholars actually felt was for signs to mark 
spuriousness. Except for the dz6/é almost the whole apparatus 
of signs seems devised for the casting out of spurious matter. 

Now Aristarchus’s own rejections are by our standards 
extremely vigorous: he rejected, for instance, all the last book of 
the Odyssey ata blow. But, compared with Zenodotus, he was 
celebrated for his περισσὴ εὐλάβεια, his ‘ excessive caution’. 
Some critics indeed have maintained that Aristarchus never 
under any circumstances made a conjecture of his own, but 
always had some MS. authority for even his smallest deletions. 
I do not agree with this view, but the question does not for the 
moment affect us.! 

The method of Zenodotus was by the standards of a modern 
critical editor amazing in its vigour. He hacked away like 
a woodman clearing an overgrown forest ; and it is clear that he 

1 See Cauer, Grundfragen, ed. 3, pp. 57 ff. 


284 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC XII 


relied largely on his personal feelings. We can see that he 
regarded the texts of his day as containing, in every part of the 
poems, whole masses of stuff that was not ‘Homer’. He 
collected many MSS., but seems not to have had any that he 
considered authoritative. He is the author of the traditional 
division of the poems into twenty-four books denoted by letters 
of the alphabet, the //ad having capital letters, the Odyssey 
small. Being himself an epic poet he used his critical faculty and 
rejected much merely because it was ‘unseemly’; it is possible 
that he even rewrote some passages out of his head. The 
freedom of the old bards was not entirely dead in the first of 
the critics,1 

Thanks tothe brilliant pioneer work of Zenodotus, Aris- 
tarchus was able to proceed with more caution, The ground 
had been cleared for him, and, besides, the Ptolemies had been 
for some generations zealously collecting MSS. But it is note- 
worthy that when Aristarchus does cite a MS. authority for 
some reading, he never shows knowledge of any particular 
authoritative MS. nor of any widespread and authoritative 
tradition. His authorities are such as ἡ Σινωπική, ἡ Μασσι- 
λιωτική, ἡ κατὰ “Ριανόν, ἡ κατ᾽ ᾿Αντίμαχον, ai κοιναί, αἱ δημώδεις, 
αἱ χαριέστεραι, τινὲς τῶν παλαιῶν κτλ. One of these, ἡ κοινή, it 
may be said, is exactly ‘the Vulgate’. Possibly ; but, if so, the 
‘vulgate’ of that day differed demonstrably from ours, and 
what is more important, was regarded by Aristarchus with some 
contempt. He speaks of ai κοιναί or ai δημώδεις as one might 
spealx of ‘ the cheap editions ’.* 

This seems to show that (1) Zenodotus found the text in 
a state of great disorder, and (2) neither he nor Aristarchus had 
any authoritative MS. tradition by which to correct it. The one 
recension which Aristarchus thought worthy of a special critical 
sign was not an ancient vulgate but the edition of Zenodotus. 

This conclusion is vehemently opposed by many conservative 
critics. Obviously those who wish to maintain that our present 
Lhad and Odyssey were written, approximately as they stand, by 


1 Literature in Susemihl, Alexandr. Literaturg. i. 333; see especially 
Roemer. I omit the work of Aristophanes (fl. c. 200 B.C.) for the sake of 
simplicity. Susemihl, i. 428-48. 

2. Ludwich, Homervulgata, p. 49. 


XII WAS THERE AN ANCIENT VULGATE? δὃς 


one great poet in the eleventh century B.C., cannot possibly admit 
that the text was still in a very fluid state so late as the third 
century. The position of Ludwich, for instance, is that, roughly 
speaking, our present vulgate was in existence as an authoritative 
text from the very earliest ages, and passed unscathed through 
the illiterate centuries of early Greece, through the creative fer- 
ment of the fifth century, through the chaos of the pre-Zenodotean 
texts, and lastly through the fires of Alexandrian criticism, always 
unmentioned but universally recognized, to emerge in triumph 
in our post-Christian MSS. 

Observe that there are two questions at issue. First, did there 
exist at all in pre-Alexandrian times a text like our traditional 
one? Second, was this text, if it existed, an authoritative vulgate ? 
To the second I think the answer is a confident No: as to the 
first I can find no conclusive evidence. But let us consider what 
there is. We shall find it in two places. First, in such frag- 
ments of MSS. as have come down to us from the times before 
Aristarchus ; secondly, in the quotations made from Homer by 
classical writers. In the history of this controversy the evidence 
of the quotations came first. The great Wolf, who entirely 
denied the existence of any text like ours in pre-Alexandrian 
times, mentions as a certain fact, 


quod apud Hippocratem Platonem Aristotelem et alios istius 
aetatis scriptores non solum singulorum verborum varietates, 
sed etiam plures insignes versus legimus, quorum nec in 
textu nostro nec in Eustathio veterrimisque et doctissimis 
scholiis ullum indicium superest. (Prolegomena, Ὁ. 37.) 


It might have been more prudent to write deschinem instead 
of Platonem, but in the main I consider this statement just in 
itself and signally confirmed by recent discoveries. 

But quotations are slippery witnesses. It will be best to start 
with the more positive evidence, that of the pre-Aristarchean 
papyri. We should remark at the outset that in the case of 
Euripides and Plato, and, one may say, practically every classical 
author except Homer, the early papyri, where they exist at all, 
confirm to an extraordinary degree the accuracy of our MS. 
tradition. In no case are there any large differences. How does 
the case stand with Homer ? 

I. 1, There are altogether, according to Dr. Hunt’s estimate, 


286 THE (RISE OF THE GREEK 7) EPIC XII 


some two hundred fragmentary papyri of the Homeric poems, 
the Z/ad being about twice as well represented in them as the 
Odyssey. Of these eight were written earlier than 150 B.C., and 
therefore have a direct evidential value for the present question. 

The first of these to be discovered was the Flinders Petrie 
papyrus (Dublin, 1891) in two fragmentary columns, which 
contained A 502-37, the ends of 502-17 in the first column, the 
beginnings of 518-37 in the second. The main conclusions 
are given thus by Ludwich. Of the ends seven out of twenty 
are different from our vulgate, of the beginnings four out of 
nineteen. There are altogether thirty-nine lines instead of the 
thirty-six of the vulgate, the number being made up by the addi- 
tion of four lines, hitherto unknown, and the omission of one. 

This extraordinary result was accepted by some scholars as 
showing that our vulgate text was merely a product of 
Alexandrian criticism; by others it was brushed aside as the 
accident of a single eccentric or ‘wild’ MS. Such a MG., they 
held, could not be a fair specimen of the pre-Alexandrian texts. 
Since that time, however, our specimens of such papyri have been 
slowly growing both in number and size,! and they all show in 
varying degrees the same general features. They all tend to 
have additional lines and to leave out some lines that we know. 
And where the lines coincide with the vulgate, the readings 
inside the line, as far as we can judge from the fragments, seem 
often to have been different. The papyri in question are as 
follows: the sign + denotes additional lines found in the papyrus, 
— denotes lines omitted. The number in brackets is that given 
in the adparatus criticus of Mr. Allen’s Oxford critical text of 
Homer. 

I. (8 Allen) P. Petrie, beginning of second century B.C., 
containing A 502-37 (39 verses: +4—1; at least 11 variant 
readings). 

II. (5) P. Genavensis, early second century. A 788-M 11 
(70 verses: +13—0; many variant readings). 

ΠῚ, (41) P. Grenfell II, 3, and Hibeh I, 20. Parts of '4 E 
(66 verses: +1—3: ‘differed widely from the vulgate’). 


’ Dr. Hunt informs me of three more early papyri: one a fragment of 
Z, which approximates to our text [now published as Pap. Ox. 1388]; two of 
e, both wild. 


XII EVIDENCE OF THE PAPYRI 287 


IV. (7) P. Grenfell II, 2, and Hibeh I, 21, © 17-258 (97 verses: 
+ 28—o: between © 52 and 66 there are+ 21). 

V. (12) P. Grenfell II, 4, and Hibeh I, 22. Between ᾧ 387 
and ¥ 281 (190 verses: +certainly 11, perhaps 20; —?). 

VI. (40) Hibeh I, 19. Between B 174-830 and I" 277-371 
(105 verses: +13: many variants). 

VII. (19 in Odyssey list) Hibeh I, 23, v 41-68 (30 verses: 
+3-1). 

VIII. Rylands 49. Beginnings of IT 484-9; six beginnings, 
one of them different. 

Lastly, two Heidelberg fragments, known to me by the kind- 
ness of Dr. Gerhardt, the learned editor of Phozuzx of Colophon, 
who has since published them : 

Heid. IV. © 191 ff., 16 lines, from the same MS. as IV (τό 
verses +4). 

Heid. V. 183 lines from ᾧ X W, from the same MS. as IV 
(roughly something making the average about + 7—2 per cent. 
This is the nearest to the vulgate that has been found). 

Rather later in date but similar in character is a papyrus of the 
_ first century B.C. in Berliner Klassrkerteate, v, p. 18, containing 

the end of Σ΄, with the description of the shield of Achilles. 
This is so instructive that I cite it in full. 

Σ 596-602 agree with the vulgate : then it runs: 

603 πολλὸς δ᾽ ἱμερόεντα χορὸν περιΐσταθ᾽ ὅμιλος 

604-5 τερπόμενοι" δοιὼ δὲ κυβιστητῆρε κατ᾽ αὐτοὺς 

606 μολπῆς ἐξάρχοντες ἐδίνευον κατὰ μέσσους. 

606% ἐν δ᾽ ἔσσαν σύριγγες, ἔσαν κίθαρίς τε καὶ αὐλοί. 

607 ἐν δ᾽ ἐτίθει ποταμοῖο μέγα σθένος ᾿Ωκεανοῖο 

608 ἄντυγα πὰρ πυμάτην σάκεος πύκα ποιητοῖο. 

608* ἐν δὲ λιμὴν ἐτέτυκτο ἑανοῦ κασσίτεροιο (.45215 207-8) 

» κλυζομένῳ ἴκελος" δοιὼ δ᾽ ἀναφυσιοῶντες (209-11) 
© ἀργύρεοι δελφῖνες ἐφοίνεον ἔλλοπας ἰχθῦς. (212) 
ἀ τρῦ δ' ὕπο χάλκειοι τρέον ἰχθύες" αὐτὰρ ἐπ᾽ ἀκταῖς (213) 

(I accept the editors’ restorations: they are generally pretty 
certain and do not affect the argument.) 

Observe: 604-5 are run together. In our vulgate they 
stand 

τερπόμενοι" μετὰ δέ σφιν ἐμέλπετο θεῖος ἀοιδὸς 
φορμίῴζων, δοιὼ δὲ κτλ. 


288 THE RISE ΟΕ THE GREEK, EPIC XII 


But our vulgate has here behaved oddly. Editors have 
forsaken the MSS. and inserted a phrase from the Odyssey 
(δ 17-18) on the evidence of Athenaeus (p. 180 c), who says 
that the lines in question originally belonged to 3 and not to the 
Odyssey. 

606° is a new line. 608?» °¢4 are not known to us in Homer, 
but a passage closely similar, though slightly longer, stands 
in our text of Hesiod, 4sfzs 207-13 describing the shield of 
Heracles. 

What is the meaning ot such a phenomenon as this? <A 
passage known to our tradition as part of the Hesiodic Shield of 
Heracles appears in this MS. as part of the Homeric Shield 
of Achilles. It is clearly not the mistake of a copyist. It is, as 
Diels and others have seen, the deliberate variation of a rhapsode, 
who preferred his ‘Shield’ in that form. He shortened the 
expression a good deal and he got in the description of a 
harbour with plunging dolphins. Whether his judgement was 
wise may well be disputed; the point is that apparently he 
thought he had a right to make it. The text of this passage was 
not absolutely fixed as canonical even by the time this MS. 
was written—when Aristarchus had perhaps been dead fifty 
years.! 

The same explanation seems to me to apply to all the facts 
about these pre-Alexandrian MSS. The text was still very fluid, 
at any rate in places. For, as Grenfell and Hunt have pointed 
out, the additional verses are not scattered evenly all over the 


1 This is not an isolated phenomenon. The Townley Scholia on © 804, 
the last line of the //iad, mention that instead of 


“ὡς οἵ γ᾽ ἀμφίεπον τάφον Ἕκτορος ἱπποδάμοιο 
some MSS. read 


“Qs οἵ γ᾽ ἀμφίεπον τάφον Ἕκτορος" ἦλθε δ᾽ ᾿Αμαζών, 
"Apnos θυγάτηρ μεγαλήτορος ἀνδροφόνοιο. 


That is, they ran on from the end of our ///ad to another story, the Ae¢hiopis, 
about the Queen of the Amazons. And in some cases such a mixture of 
sources has actually become canonical. The end of the 7heogony in all our 
MSS. is mixed up with another poem, The Catalogue of Women who were 
loved by gods. The MSS. of our Shield of Heracles have attached that 
poem to one of the éoiai, or used the éo0ié, so to speak, as a peg. See also 
the striking Faytim fragment (Allen 53) giving the Chryseis episode (A 486 ff.) 
in the words of the Hymn to Apollo, 503 ff. Cauer, Grundfr.’, pp. 44 ff. Cf. 
Bolling in A. 7. P. 1914, pp. 125 ff. 


ΧΙ EVIDENCE OF ANCIENT QUOTATIONS 289 


poems, but are concentrated in particular parts. They come 
where the texture of the narrative is loose: where inorganic 
verses can easily be added, or whole formulae of two or three 
lines inserted. To put the same fact from a different point 
of view, some parts of the poems were specially well known and 
canonical; others were still fluid and indefinite—the less 
interesting, the merely transitional, the parts perhaps which were 
not often chosen for recitation, though they had to exist in any 
professedly complete text. 

There is, for instance, perhaps no part of the poems which has 
been more ‘suspected’ by scholars than ©. According to 
Wilamowitz it was largely composed very late in order to make 
room in the /Zad for I and K. And a glance at the list above 
will show the extraordinary ‘ wildness’ of the three fragments of 
the papyrus containing ©. We shall find a similar wildness 
about © in the quotations. 

We may also observe that the new lines seem generally, though 
not always, to be made up of lines or half-lines or phrases which 
occur elsewhere in the poems; very few seem to have been 
original or vital poetry. The Alexandrian critics were wise in 
the use of their obelus. 


2. Let us now take the quotations. 

At the first blush we can see one thing. There are a good 
many small fragments quoted from Homer by various authors 
which do not occur in our text. Of fifth-century authors, Pindar 
observes that Homer says that a noble messenger gives dignity 
to any business. Our Homer never gets nearer to that than to 
say that it 15 ἃ good thing when a messenger is tactful. Hippo- 
crates mentions that Homer knew that cattle suffered in winter ; 
that is why he wrote ὡς δ᾽ ὁπότ᾽ ἀσπάσιον ἔαρ ἤλυθε βουσὶν 
ἕλιξι. Our Homer writes nothing of the sort. In the fourth 
century Aeschines says that ‘Homer says several times in the 
Lad φήμη δ᾽ ἐς στρατὸν ἦλθε": the phrase never occurs in our 
liad. Xenophon cites from Homer the phrases γάνυται δέ 7’ 
ἀκούων and πυκινὰ φρεσὶ μήδεα εἰδώς, which do not occur. 
Aristotle, who uses Homer a great deal, quotes quite a number 
of lines unknown to our texts;! πὰρ yap ἐμοὶ θάνατος, “Exropa 


1 Pind. PyéA. iv. 277, cf. O 207; Hippocr. περὶ ἄρθμων iii, p. 146 K. (p. 62, 
2760 U 


290 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC XII 


δ᾽ αἰδὼς εἷλε, “Εκτωρ κεῖτ᾽ ἀλλοφρονέων, μῦσεν δὲ περὶ βροτόεσσ᾽ 
ὠτειλή, Ζεὺς γάρ οἱ νεμέσασχ᾽ ὅτ᾽ ἀμείνονι φωτὶ μάχοιτο. 
Besides these completely unknown lines, he quotes known 
passages in a strange shape; he found δίδομεν δέ of εὖχος ἀρέσθαι 
not in ® 297 where we have it, but in β 15; he found ὃ 567 ina 
shorter form; he found our lines μ 219 ff., or something very 
like them, in a speech of Calypso; he found part of our descrip- 
tion of the Cyclops in the ninth Odyssey as a description of the 
Calydonian Boar in the tenth /Zad: he expressly says that 
Odysseus’ story to Penelope (¥ 310-41) occupied ‘ only sixty’ 
lines: in our text it occupies thirty-three. In A¢hzcs, p. 1116 
b 24, there are four phrases quoted from ‘ Homer ’, two incorrect 
and two unrecognizable. It is also worth noting that Aristophanes 
says that Homer describes Iris in words which in our text apply 
not to Iris but to Hera and Athena; or that Plato read μήτηρ 
instead of “Exrwp in Z 402, making a change not only in wording 
but in a statement of fact. 

This list is not complete, but, even apart from the evidence οἱ 
the papyri, it seems to me quite conclusive. There must have 
been current in the fourth century texts of Homer very different 
indeed from ours. Make handsome allowance for slips of memory 
and the like, the testimony of these unknown lines is not to be 
overthrown, and cannot even be shaken by any but the most 
overwhelming evidence on the other side. 

That evidence Ludwich has tried to produce. He collects 
a great list of Homeric quotations in authors of the fourth 
century or earlier, covering some 480 lines, and urges us not 
to concentrate our attention on the ‘ wild’ lines which reject our 
text, but on the great majority of ‘ tame’ lines which conform to it. 

Let us consider this plea. The evidence of quotations is 
always hard to use, as certainly an editor of Euripides is not 
likely to forget. The quoter may err in memory; he may adapt 
the words of the poet to his own purpose; he may intentionally 
omit lines. He will quote chiefly what is striking and interest- 
ing. In the special case before us, what we have to make out is 
Erm.) ; Aeschin. i. 128 (Blass); Xen. Symp. 8. 30; Aristot., pp. 1285 a 10, 
1230 a 18, 404 a 29, fr. 167 Rothe, 1387 a 32; 162 b 7, 943 Ὁ 21, 1109 a 30, 


578 b 2, 1417 a12; Ar. Av. 575; Plato, Craz. 392 Ὁ. See also fragments in 


Allen, vol. v, pp. 146 ff.— Hippocrates and Pindar may have used ‘ Homer’ in 
a wider sense, see p- 298. 


XII PAPYRI AND QUOTATIONS AGREE 201 


whether each quotation in the ancient authors seems most likely 
to come from a text practically identical with our vulgate or from 
one like the pre-Aristarchean papyri. 

Now, in the first place, single lines or bits of lines which 
agree with our text prove nothing. They doubtless also occurred 
in the ‘wildest’ papyri. Conventional phrases and epic runs 
prove nothing for thesame reason. Even if there were a general 
tendency not to quote the ‘additional’ lines much, that would 
prove nothing, because the additional lines are seldom striking 
or quotable. Mere descriptions of facts or abbreviations of long 
passages seldom prove anything, because the differences between 
the papyri and the vulgate would scarcely show inthem, Slight 
variations in language, on the other hand, do not prove much, 
nor do omissions of lines. They may be mere mistakes of 
the quoter. Such things are common in the quotations from 
Euripides. Out of the great list of quotations given by Ludwich, 
covering some 480 lines of the ZZad and Odyssey, more than 
half fall away at once as non-evidential. 

If we take only the quotations of more than three consecutive 
lines we have some approach to firmer ground, We may class 
them as follows: Agreeing but not conclusively, two passages : 

A 17-42, referred to by Plat. Red. iii. 393 d, in a fairly close 
indirect description, with many lines omitted. 

B 671-4: three half-lines cited in 47. οί, iii. 12, p. 1414.4 2. 

Disagreeing but not conclusively, five : 

I 497-501 in Plat. Rep. 11, 364 d, one line omitted; wording 
slightly different. 

I 308-14 in Plat. 47:22. 77:71. 364 ε (cf. 370 a), one line omitted. 

A 446-50, roughly cited in Ar, Pax 1273: not much evidence, 
but a much-suspected breast-plate line is omitted (σὺν δ᾽ ἔγχεα 
καὶ péve’ ἀνδρῶν χαλκεοθωρήκων). 

T 109-13 in Plat. Re. ii. 363 b, one line omitted. 

v 351-7 in Plat. 7072 538 e, one striking line omitted and word- 
ing slightly different. 

Clearly agreeing, perhaps twelve (occasionally with some 
verbal variation): Z 289-92 in Hdt. ii. 116; Odyssey, δ 227-30 
in Hdt. ii. 116 (cf. Theophr. de Plant. ix. 15. 1); O 494-9 in 
Lyc. zz Leocr. ὃ 103 (differences); 3 324-9 in Aeschines, i. 
§ 143; ¢ 42-5 in Ps,-Aristot. de Mundo, 6, Ὁ. 400 a 6; I 357-63 

U 2 


292 THE RISE. OF THE GREEK EPIC XII 


in Plat. “7122. 771η:. 370 Ὁ (cf. Crito, 44 b); I 650-5, ibidem, 
371 ὃ; M 200-7 in Plat. Joz 539 b; YW 335-40 in Plat. 7022 537a 
(cf. Xen. Sywpos. 4. 6); ὦ 6-9 in Plat. Rep. iii. 387 a; 1 112—- 
15 in Plat. Legg. iii. 680 Ὁ; & 96-102 in Plat. Legg. iv. 706 4 
(slight differences). 

Conclusively and markedly disagreeing we find seven at 
least : 

B 188-202 in Xen. Mem. i. 2. 58; six verses omitted, 
probably not by accident, as they were counted spurious by 
Aristarchus. 

B 391 ff. in Arist. Po/. ili. 14 (p. 1285 a 10), with an unknown 
half-line added, πὰρ yap ἐμοὶ θάνατος. 

¥ 95-9 in Aeschin. 1. 150, markedly different wording. 

¥ 77-91, ib. 146, with two new lines, one line inserted from 
elsewhere, and several differences of wording. 

Ὦ 10-12 in Plat. Rep. iii. 388 a, considerable differences of 
wording. 

2 527-32, ib. ii. 379 c, with one strange line substituted for 
one of ours. 

© 548-52 in the Platonic A/czbzades ii, Ὁ. 149 d, with four 
completely new lines added. 

The proportion is just about what it ought to be. The 
quotations, where they are long enough to afford a fair test, 
instead of lifting a loud protest against the evidence of the 
papyri, simply and clearly confirm it. 


There is one point more. Grenfell and Hunt, in their 
masterly discussion of this question in the introduction to Pap. 
Hibeh 19, have shown that if a dividing line be drawn at 150 B.C. 
all MSS. earlier than that date differ ‘enormously’ both from 
our vulgate and from Aristarchus, and all tend to be longer 
except possibly Hibeh 20.1 After 150 B. Cc. the tendency of MSS. 
to differ from the vulgate diminishes rapidly, and by the 
beginning of the Roman period ‘the numerous Homeric frag- 
ments published in recent years very rarely contain new verses, 
and serve to illustrate only too well the overwhelming  pre- 
dominance of the vulgate’. Zenodotus had laid the foundations 


1 This exception is considered by Dr. Gerhardt, in his introduction to the 
new Heidelberg fragments, to melt away in the light of later evidence. 


XI INFLUENCE OF ARISTARCHUS 293 


of criticism about 280 B.c. Aristophanes and others followed him. 
The floruit of Aristarchus, most successful and universally 
acclaimed of Homer scholars, is 160 B.C.; the triumph of the 
vulgate begins about 150 B.C. The dates speak for themselves. 
The predominance of a much-castigated and purified text was 
due directly or indirectly to the great critics of the Alexandrian 
age. Can we go further than this, and pronounce it definitely 
the work of Aristarchus? That view, put forward by Wolf and 
Nauck, and probable on general grounds, has hitherto seemed to 
break down on the detailed evidence of the scholia, but is now 
almost proved to be right by the acute researches of Professor 
G.M. Bolling of Ohio! He has collected in the vulgar tradition— 
both in the MSS. and the post-Aristarchean papyri—all the 
lines of doubtful authenticity, and finds that all the directly 
attested differences between the vulgate and Aristarchus are due 
to interpolations in the vulgate, while, conversely, no line which 
is an interpolation in the vulgate can be shown to have been in 
Aristarchus’ text. That text contained about 15,600 lines, to 
which some 92 have been added by interpolation in the course of 
the last two thousand years. 

But, granted that the present vulgate had in pre-Alexandrian 
times no central and dominant position—and most scholars have 
been convinced by Grenfell and Hunt—one question still 
remains. Did our vulgate exist at all in classical times, or is it, 
very much as Wolf thought, a later creation altogether, a text 
hammered out for the first time by the impact of Alexandrian 
criticism upon a fluid but rather obstinate tradition ? 

The point is a doubtful one, and depends mainly on the 
quotations in Plato. They, as may have been seen above, resemble 
our text pretty closely. 

Ona rough analysis, there are twenty-three ὃ quotations in 
Plato which definitely agree with our text; there are eigh- 

1 A, 7. P. xxxvii (1916), pts. 1 and 4; cf. Modern Philology, xvii. 3 (1922). 


Ch GCauer, le) iechap. 3. 
2 a Agreeing, sometimes with slight variations :— 


Aisf. ef. ill. 393 a. M 200-7. Jon 539 Ὁ. 
A599 f. ep. 111. 389 a. P 446 f. Axioch. 367 d. 
EM27h Aver i.psord. =23f. Rep. ili. 388 Ὁ: 

I 357-63. App. Min. 370 Ὁ. T92f. Sympos. 195 ἃ. 
1644f. Cratyl. 428 Ὁ. X 414 f. Rep. ili. 388 Ὁ. 


1650-5. Hipp. Min. 371 b. Ψ 103f. Rep. iii. 386 d. 


294 THE RISE OF “THE (GREEK EPIC XII 


teen "ἢ of no evidential value, being too short, too vague, or con- 
taining mere epic phrases which might come anywhere ; there 
are seven © which omit lines in the middle ; four that vary consider- 
ably in wording and three that vary very slightly ;4 there are 
seven which definitely differ from our text by additional lines or 
conflated lines ;° and there is lastly the perfectly ‘ wild’ quota- 
tion from Θ᾽ in the post-Platonic Alcibiades ii. It needs a bold 
man to argue from this that Plato’s text was our text. Still it is 


Ψ 335-40. 7071 537 a. 0 245f. Avxioch. 368 a. 

2 80-2. Lon 538 d. Ὁ 347. Charm. 161 a. 

a 32-4. Alcid. ii. 142 d. p 485 f. Ref. ii. 381 d. 

y 26-8. Lege. vii. 804 a. v17f. Phaedong4d; Rep. iii. 390d 
ι 112-15. Legg. 111. 680 Ὁ. iv. 441 b. 


489-91. Ref. 111. 386 c, vii. 516d. 6-9. ef. iil. 387 a. 
Ὁ Agreeing, but non-evidentially :— 


A 17-42. Rep. 111. 393 d. ᾧ 308 f. Profag. 340 a. 
B 813 f. Cratyl. 392 a. X 506 f. Craty/. 392 d. 
E 221 f. Cratyl. 407 ἃ. Woof. ef. iii. 387 a. 
Z235f. Sympos. 219 a. Q15f. Rep. 111. 391 Ὁ. 
6 14. Phaedon 112 a. 2525 f. Axioch. 367 d. 
Wr12f. Rep. viii. 545 ἃ. λ 633 f. Sympos. 198 c. 
II 856 f. (phrases). ef. iil. 386 d. p 383 f. Ref. iii. 389d. 
= 108 f. Phileb. 47 ε. 7 395f. eds. 1. 334 b. 
Y 64 f. (phrases). ef. iii. 386 c. x 1-4. Jon 535 Ὁ. 


© Omitting lines :— 
I 308-14 (om. 1). fp. Min. 365 a; ib. 370 4. 
1 497-501 (om. 1). ef. ii. 364 d. 
= 96-104 (om. 6). Afolog. 28 c. 
X 15-20 (om. 4). ep. 111. 391 a. 
τ 109-13 (om.1). ef. 11. 363 b. 
tT 173-9 (om. 3). 77Ζ705 319 Ὁ. 
v 351-7 (om. 1). /om 539 ἃ. 


4 Different in wording :— 
= 96-102. Legg. iv. 706 d. 
a351f. Rep. iv. 424b. 
8-10. δε. 111. 390 a. 
322 1. Leer 777 ἃ: 
A 169-71. Hipp. Min. 370 ς (slightly). 
Π 433 f. Rep. ii. 388 c (slightly). 
X 168 f. ep. ili. 388 c (slightly). 
© Different by additional or conflated lines, &c. :-— 
Τ 8 ἘΔ 431. Rep, 111. 389 e. 
A 218-19. Rep. 111. 408 a. 
Z 402 (μήτηρ). Cratyl. 392 Ὁ. 
A 639+630. 7021: 538 Ὁ. 
= 295 f. ep. iii. 399 Ὁ. 
Q 10-12. Rep. 111. 388 a. 
Q 527-32 (new line). ef. ii. 379 ἃ. 
© 548-52(+4). «46. i. 149 ἃ (wild). 


XII PLATO'S TEXT OF HOMER 295 


clear that Plato’s quotations are much closer to our text than 
those of any other fourth-century writer. 

The simplest conclusion would be to assume that Plato used 
a text very like ours. Yet perhaps that would be a mistake. 
Among the writings of the first disciples of Aristarchus we find 
one by Ammonius, περὶ τῶν ὑπὸ Πλάτωνος ἐὲ Ὁμήρου μετε- 
νηνεγμένων, ‘On Plato’s quotations from Homer’. The purpose 
of the book was textual recension. That is, the quotations in 
Plato were a recognized authority for the text of Homer in 
Alexandrian times. There was a whole small literature on Plato's 
relation to Homer. He shared with Herodotus the title of 
Ὁμηρικώτατος, and exercised a quite special influence on the 
Alexandrian school. Is it, perhaps, not Plato who agrees with 
our vulgate, but our vulgate which, wherever it had the evidence, 
tried deliberately to follow the readings of Plato? It is curious, 
at any rate, that the writer whose quotations, few as they are, 
come next to Plato’s for conformity with our text, is the other 
recognized ‘ Homerikotatos’, Herodotus.! 


II. The verbal text, then, was still fluid and subject to change 
as late as the fourth and third centuries B.c._ What can we be 
sure of as fixed? The whole main structure, one would suppose, 
the incidents and the order in which they followed one another. 
Yet even here one cannot feel absolute confidence, at any rate for 
the fourth century and earlier. 

For instance, to take an observation made by the late 
Professor M. L. Earle of Columbia University: Thucydides, 
i. I1, I, writes about the Greeks at Troy: ‘ When they landed 
they must have won a battle; otherwise they would not have 
built the fortification round the camp.’? This shows that 
Thucydides (1) knew of the wall round the camp so frequently 


1 See Sengebusch, Dissert. Priov., pp. 118-24 ; Ludwich, p. 141, note. In 
the next generation Trypho wrote περὶ τῆς ἀρχαίας ἀναγνώσεως, which Senge- 
busch interprets ‘On the readings of Homer shown in the ancient quotations in 
general’, Sengeb., p.124. Cf. Susemihl, A/exandr. Litter., pp. 154 and 212. 
See also Howes, Harvard Studies in Cl. Phil. vi (1895), Ὁ pp. 153 ff. 

2 ᾿Επειδὴ δ᾽ ἀφικόμενοι μάχῃ ἐκράτησαν" δῆλον δέ" τὸ γὰρ ἔρυμα τῷ στρατοπέδῳ 
οὐκ ἂν ἐτειχίσαντο. Thiersch ἐκρατήθησαν, ‘lost a battle’, which Earle accepts. 
The reading does not affect the present argument. The same suggestion, it 
is interesting to find, was made long ago by Hermann; Ofzscu/a, vol. viii, 
ps 387 (371)... See Prof. Earle’s Collected Essays, pp. 142-4. 


296 THE, RISE OF ΤΗΝ GREEK EPIC XII 


mentioned in our //zad, and (2) surmised that it must have been 
built at the beginning of the war, after the first battle. 

Now in our Zhad (H 337 ff., 436 ff.) the building of this wall 
and the exact circumstances which led to it are fully described, 
and are not what Thucydides conjectures they ‘ must have been ’. 
It was built ina great rush and in picturesque conditions during 
a scanty truce in the tenth year of the war. It is noteworthy 
that the particular passage in H has been marked by Kochly and 
many other critics as ‘ recentissima’.} 

The view we take of this bold suggestion will obviously 
depend largely on the presence or absence of other symptoms 
pointing in a similar direction. It is always hard to get out 
of our minds the associations of printed books, which appear 
in definite editions in a complete form, all the copies identical. 
But let us look at the direct evidence. 

There are still extant many MSS. which omit the Catalogue 
in B, though, curiously enough, they give the series of similes 
with which it is introduced. ‘That is, even at the time when the 
vulgate became predominant, the Catalogue was not definitely 
established as a necessary part of the //ad. 

There are no MSS. now which omit K, but a note in the very 
valuable Townley scholia informs us: ‘They say that K was 
originally placed apart by Homer and is not part of the Z/ad, 
but was put into it by Pisistratus.’* The statement is repeated 
in the learned scholia to Dionysius Thrax and in Eustathius, who 
ascribes it to ‘the ancients’. That is—to put the case at its 
lowest—there was an ancient tradition which knew of, or believed 
in, the existence of 7Zads without Καὶ as well as Z/zads with. 

We also know that Aristarchus thought the last book of the 
Odyssey (w) spurious, and that both he and Aristophanes of 
Byzantium considered y 296 as ‘the end of the Odyssey’. This 
does not necessarily imply that he knew of MSS. without 
or without the end of y, but it does show that the canon was 
still far from certain. 

If such large stretches of the poem were not definitely estab- 

1 Plato’s citation of H 321 in Rep. v. 468 ἃ does not of course affect the 
question. 

3 Φασὶ τὴν ῥαψωδίαν id’ “Ομήρον ἰδίᾳ τετάχθαι καὶ μὴ εἶναι μέρος τῆς ᾿Ιλιάδος, 


ὑπὸ δὲ Πεισιστράτου τετάχθαι εἰς τὴν ποίησιν. Schol.Ton Ki. Eustathius says 
φασὶν οἱ παλαιοί, evidently referring to the same source. 


XU THE, TEX IN ΠΡ RIPPER CENTURY 297 


lished even in Alexandrian times, it is obviously quite possible 
that a passage like the Building of the Wall was not definitely 
established in the time of Thucydides. We must not be indignant 
merely because such a result would show a conjecture of many 
modern critics to be probably right. 

Is there any other test that we can apply? Only one has 
occurred to me, rather a curious one. 

It is well known that, for some reason, the Attic tragedians in 
choosing their subjects made it a careful rule to avoid the main 
subjects and incidents of the 7“Zad and Odyssey. We know, 1 
suppose, the subjects of some two hundred tragedies by the three 
great writers, and the rule is well kept up. There is, indeed, 
one great exception, a lost trilogy of Aeschylus (Zyrmzdons, 
Nereids, Phrygians) which dealt directly with the subject of Z/zad 
I-N. Its date is unknown; but it comes very early in the 
history of Greek tragedy, and, apparently, the experiment it 
made was never repeated. In Satyr plays the rule did not hold. 
You could burlesque ‘ Homer’, as in the Cyc/ogs and in Sophocles’ 
Washing Girls, or Nausicaa.’ But you avoided attempting to 
treat again in the high style at the Dionysia subjects which your 
public already knew in the Recitations at the Panathenaea. I 
can only make out two certain exceptions. One is the Rhesus, 
which treats in full detail the story of Dolon, 7“ad K; the other 
is a Catalogue of the Greek ships in the /Ahzgenta 772 Aules 
(164-302). The Doloneia and the Catalogue! Just the two 
parts of the 7/ad which we know to have been uncanonical ! 

On the whole it seems to me probable that Thucydides used, 
or learnt at school, or heard recited at the Panathenaea, an ας 
without the account of the Wall-building, Euripides an Jad 
without the Catalogue, the author of the RAesws an iad with- 
out K. There is a good field here for further research. 


Ill. In the age of Euripides and Thucydides, then, it would 
seem from the evidence that the “7 ας and Odyssey differed from 
our vulgate not only in the matter of exact words and lines, but 
even in large portions of the story. ‘ Homer’ meant to them, as 

1 T agree with Valckenaer, Diatribe 209, and Lessing. Welcker, building 
on the far from clear passage in Eustathius, //zad, p. 381, thought the Πλύντριαι 


a tragedy (Gr. Zrag. i. 227), and his view has been commonly accepted. It 
was a not unusual subject for comedies. 


298 THE RISE OF THE GREEK: EPIC ΧΙ 


to us, ‘the author of the //ad and the Odyssey’, but we cannot 
be sure that either 7/ad or Odyssey was exactly what we mean by 
those words. If we goa century further back, however, we find 
that the meaning of ‘ Homer’ also is different. His name covers 
not only the //ad and the Odyssey, but much wider and vaguer 
masses of epic writing as well. Let us take the quotations. 

Kallinus, our earliest witness, in the eighth or seventh century 
B.C., cites the Zebazd as Homer’s (Paus. ix. 9. 5.). Simonides 
—either the great Simonides of the early fifth century or he of 
Amorgos in the seventh—quotes a proverbial line that comes in 
our Z 146 as the work of ‘a man of Chios’: probably meaning 
‘Homer’! The great Simonides quotes ‘Homer and Stesi- 
chorus’ as describing how Meleager ‘surpassed all the young 
men in spear-throwing across the wild Anauros’. ‘This does not 
come from our Homer; possibly it came from that old Meleager 
epos which is a supposed source for 7Zad I. Pindar quotes the 
Odyssey in Nem. vii. 20; he quotes the unknown line about the 
messenger in Pyth. iv. 277;" in Zsthmz. iii. 53 he seems to say 
that Homer has told ‘all the virtue of Aias’, including his death. 
This could scarcely refer to our Ziad. In fr. 189 he mentions 
that Homer wrote the Cygrza and gave it for his daughter’s 
dowry. Herodotus himself, when he says that Cleisthenes in 
his anti-Argive policy silenced the rhapsodes in Sicyon ‘on 
account of the poems of Homer, in which the Argives and 
Argos are generally glorified in every way’, has been considered 
with some probability to refer to the 7hedazs. Lastly, when 
Aeschylus described his tragedies as merely ‘slices from the 
great banquets of Homer’, it is perfectly clear that he did not 
mean that they were taken from the //ad and Odyssey—which 
they markedly avoid. When we hear that ‘Sophocles rejoiced 
in the Epic Cycle’, and when Proclus tells us, quite correctly, 
that ‘the ancients attributed also the Cycle to Homer’, we can 
understand the situation. The‘ cycle’, as Wilamowitz and others 
have shown, was a compendium of epic history made up out of 
various early masses of poetry. Sophocles and Aeschylus both 
‘rejoiced in’ and took ‘slices out of’ that same great body of 
poetry, all of which was ‘Homer’. They did what the vase- 

' Callinus 6, Simonides 85, 53, in Bergk’s fourth edition. 
2. See above, p. 289. S$ Hdt: v.67 5 Athsi347 Εἰ, 1052). 8. 


XII SELECTION OF ILIAD AND ODYSSEY 299 


painters did : these also probably considered that they drew their 
subjects from Homer, but, with few exceptions, they do not take 
them from the Z/ad or the Odyssey. 

The first of our authorities to reject any of this work as non- 
Homeric is Herodotus. He argues that the Cyfvza are not by 
Homer because they contradict the //ad (ii. 117). He is not 
sure whether Homer wrote the Efzgooi, a sort of sequel to the 
great Thebars (iv. 32). By about 350 B.C. the name ‘ Homer’ is 
normally used in our traditional sense, for the author of the 
Itad and Odyssey and no other epics besides. Yet there are 
still isolated exceptions, as when Antigonus of Carystus cites 
the Zhebats as Homer’s,! or Simmias—possibly—the ‘ Little 
Iliad’, A great bas-relief full of scenes of epic tradition from 
the War of the Titans onward, intended for educational purposes 
and composed by one Theodorus in the first century B.C., is 
superscribed Θεοδώρειον μάθε τάξιν Ὁμήρου. Even as late as 


that, in certain phrases at any rate, the whole epic tradition could 
be called ‘ Homer ’. 


IV. How is this change to be explained? What force was 
working between, say, the years 500 and 400 B.C. to put the //zad 
and the Odyssey in a separate and privileged position, as the 
only true works of ‘Homer’, and thus far greater and better 
known than the rest of the epic traditional poetry? One cause 
suggests itself at once: the public Recitation at the Panathenaea. 
Let us sift the statements of our authorities on this subject. 

First, we know for certain that Homer was recited at the 
Panathenaea. The orator Lycurgus (2 Leocry., p. 209) says: 
‘Your ancestors considered Homer so noble a poet, that they 
made a law that every four years at the celebration of the 
Panathenaea his poems avd his alone should be recited by 
rhapsodes.’* There isa similar statement in Isocrates attributing 


1 See Wilamowitz, Homerische Untersuchungen, 350 ff., from whom most 
of this argument is taken. An attempt to overthrow part of it by Hiller, 22. 
Mus. N. F.xlii, pp. 321-61. 

2 Jahn-Michaelis, Bz/derchronik. 

3 Lycurg. 22: Leocr., Ὁ. 209 [ὃ 102, Bekker] βούλομαι δ᾽ ὑμῖν καὶ τὸν Ὅμηρον 
παρασχέσθαι ἐπαινῶν" οὕτω γὰρ ὑπέλαβον ὑμῶν οἱ πατέρες σπουδαῖον εἶναι ποιητήν, 
ὥστε νόμον ἕθεντο καθ᾽ ἑκάστην πενταετηρίδα τῶν Παναθηναίων μόνου τῶν ἄλλων 
ποιητῶν ῥαψῳδεῖσθαι τὰ ἔπη. Cf. Isocr. Paneg., p. 74 οἶμαι δὲ καὶ τὴν “Opnpov 
ποίησιν μείζω λαβεῖν δόξαν, ὅτι καλῶς τοὺς πολεμήσαντας τοῖς βαρβάροις ἐνεκωμίασε, 


€. 


300 THE. RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC ΧΙ 


the institution to ‘our ancestors’. The fact, therefore, is certain : 
there was a long-established rule at the Panathenaea of reciting 
‘Homer and Homer only’. 

But what does ‘ Homer’ in this context mean? [5 it the whole 
epic tradition or is it the 7/ad and the Odyssey? I think pretty 
certainly the latter.! 

The conclusive evidence lies in the words of Lycurgus. He 
says ‘Homer and Homer only’, and no one will dispute that 
in his time (c. 331 B.C.) that meant the /Zad and the Odyssey— 
unless possibly trifles like the MZargites were admitted also. 
The language of Isocrates is almost equally clear. And such 
indirect evidence as we have points in the same direction. The 
rhapsode Ion, for instance, in Plato’s dialogue about him, speaks 
definitely of reciting the 7/ad and Odyssey, and never suggests 
reciting anything else. Further, some of our witnesses state 
particularly that the law ordered the recitation to be ‘in order’, 
one reciter beginning where the other left off. It is obvious from 
the state of the text in the fourth century that this ‘order’ was 
not interpreted very rigorously. The very idea of exactitude in 
such matters isa product of a later age. But it is certainly easier 
to understand a rule that the //Zad and Odyssey should be recited 
in order, than to imagine any such attempt made upon the whole 
mass of epic saga. 

If then we take Lycurgus’s words in their natural sense, 
the whole development becomes intelligible. During the fifth 
century ‘ Homer’ gradually gets to mean the author of our two 
epics and no others; the chosen poems are known in a fixed 
order and gradually acquire a fairly fixed text; the other epics 
gradually fall out of general knowledge, and are used mainly as 
quarries of tradition from which the dramatists and others can 
carve their works. The rejected epics deteriorate in style and 
retain all their barbarities. The chosen two, still fluid and 
occupying a central position in an age of splendid and exuberant 
poetical creation, tend still to become better and better written, 
and morally more and more idealized. 


καὶ διὰ τοῦτο βουληθῆναι τοὺς προγόνους ἡμῶν: ἔντιμον, αὐτοῦ ποιῆσαι τὴν τέχνην EV 
τε τοῖς τῆς μουσικῆς ἄθλοις καὶ τῇ παιδεύσει τῶν νεωτέρων. 

1 The other view is upheld by Dr. Verrall in Zhe Bacchants of Euripides, 
pp. 175 ff. With almost all of Dr. Verrall’s argument in this essay on ‘ The 
First Homer’ I cordially agree. 


XII AN OFFICIAL TEXT? 301 


Can we make out at all why these two should have been 
selected? A certain kind of critic is ready with his answer, 
an enthusiastic description of the incomparable poetic merits of 
these two poems and their immense superiority to all the other 
poetry of which we know nothing. But the public acts of 
statesmen are not often swayed by considerations of poetry. 
If these two poems were felt in some special way to represent 
in public opinion the crown of the old Ionic poetry, that would 
be a real motive. If there was in them already some moral 
superiority, that would be a real motive. They were constantly 
used for purposes of edification. But I incline to suspect that 
Isocrates instinctively discerned the main reason: 

I believe that the poetry of Homer won greater glory 
because he nobly praised those who warred against the 
barbarian, and that this was the reason why our ancestors 


conceived the desire to make his art honoured both in the 
contests of the Muses and in the training of young men. 


(Paneg., p. 74.) 
Isocrates was, no doubt, thinking chiefly of the 7Zad: but the 
Odyssey has its national character too. The /#ad typifies the 
national heroes who warred with the Mede, the Odyssey the 
national colonists and adventurers who, trusting only to their 
brains and their courage, searched strange seas from Pantica- 
paeum to Tartessos. 


V. We can perhaps make out a little more about the text used 
at this official recitation. 

The first thing to notice is that to some extent the surface 
of Homer has in our tradition been Atticized. To what extent 
it is hard to say, since the actual spelling which has come down 
to us has passed through a further influence, that of the post- 
classical Kozué, or Common Greek. But in any case there are 
numbers of lines which run perfectly when the Ionic forms are 
restored, and are visibly wrong as they stand at present. The 
poems were generally recognized in antiquity as Ionic poems. 
Yet all our MSS. and the Alexandrians behind them unite in 
giving us the Attic forms. There is no suggestion in the 
Scholia of any other view. There are also some few obvious 
‘ Athenian interpolations’, and no doubt many more that are not 
obvious. But though some scholars in antiquity suspected them, 


302 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC XII 


there is no statement that any old MSS. left them out. What 
does this mean? Of course a great predominance of Athenian 
MSS. would surprise no one; the literary supremacy of Athens 
would ensure that. But this is much more. It means that when 
the Alexandrians were searching for ancient MSS. by which to 
correct the text, and collecting copies of various sorts in places 
ranging from Marseilles to Sinope, they could not apparently 
find a single Ionic MS. worth their notice. The Attic versions 
had completely superseded the Ionic. We can understand why 
the great collector of MSS., Aristarchus, decided that Homer 
himself must have been an Athenian. 

Zenodotus was an Ionian, and Ionian influences were strong in 
Alexandrian literature. Yet we have to admit that either there 
were no Ionic texts of Homer at all, or, if there were, they 
were so unlike and so inferior to the current Attic texts that 
critics would not consider them. Either case confirms our 
previous conclusion that the Athenian recitations exercised an 
immense influence. Cauer, indeed, argues that perhaps there 
never had been any Ionic texts at all; that epic poems had never 
been written down till they came to Athens. But this supposi- 
tion is difficult in detail. There is much detailed work in both 
liad and Odyssey, which one cannot imagine a poet carrying 
through except by careful comparison of different MSS. And 
the fate of the Samaritan scriptures shows us how completely, 
in the days before a reading public, a book might be killed. 
We need only suppose that the MSS. used in Ionia were still the 
half-secret possessions of professional bards, and that none 
amounted to a complete Iliad or Odyssey, in our sense. 


There is lastly a curious phenomenon about which it is hard 
to form a confident judgement. We find in the Scholia a clear 
tradition, backed up by a number of fairly certain corrections of 
the text by modern scholars, that at some time or other the 
poems were transliterated from the Old Attic? alphabet into the 


1 See Seeck’s Quellen der Odyssee, Verrall’s essays in The Bacchants of 
Euripides, and pp. 175 f., 179, above. 

2 Why Attic, it may be asked? Why not some primitive Ionian alphabet, 
of the days before Pisistratus ?—Athens had been the home of the poems for 
the last three hundred years; the MSS. in the hands of the Alexandrians 
seem, as we have seen, all to represent the Attic recension; and no Ionian 


ΧΙ H APXAIA ΣΗΜΑΣΙΑ 303 


new. The new is the Greek alphabet that we know: the old— 
to speak roughly—used no double letters, made no distinction 
between the three E-sounds or the three O-sounds, and used H 
to denote the aspirate." 

Now this tradition is only mentioned by the scholiasts in order 
to support conjectural changes, and it may be a conjecture itself. 
But it looks rather as if it were a true one, It does explain with 
perfect simplicity some confusions that are otherwise difficult. 
And if it is true, we are led to a curious and interesting result. 

It has been made out pretty clearly that, though Athens did 
not adopt the new alphabet for official documents till 404 B.C., it 
must have been in use in literary circles very much earlier, 
probably as far back as the days when letters were exchanged 
between Solon in Athens and Mimnermus in Ionian Colophon. 
For literature at that date was an Ionian accomplishment, and 
the new alphabet was the Ionian alphabet. How then could it 
happen that, at a time when the new Ionian alphabet was already 
used in Athens for literary purposes, the great Ionian book 
should be deliberately rewritten back into the awkward old 
Athenian script? There is only one obvious explanation. It 
was written in the official script as an official text for the per- 
formance at the Panathenaea. 

An official text dating back probably to the sixth century B.C.: 
yet we saw that in the third there was apparently no official text! 
The critics can appeal to none such. The papyri and the 
quotations show that the poems were still fluid, Is this not 
a contradiction ? 

Not necessarily, I think, for two reasons, In the first place, 
granted there was an official text made for the Panathenaea in 
the sixth century, I think it in the last degree improbable that at 
that date a reciter would be kept to it. It might be stored up, 
it might be used for show and for reference. But the whole 
notion of keeping a rhapsode to his written text, instead of 


alphabet known to us satisfies all the conditions, The very earliest Ionian 
inscriptions all have H for long E and nearly all have ὦ for the long open Ὁ. 
Doubtless at an earlier date there may have been a rudimentary Ionian 
alphabet, but, as far as I know, the Alexandrians never show any knowledge 
of it. To them the ‘Ionic alphabet’ means the ‘newalphabet’. See Cauer ὃ, 
Ρ. 126, and Fick in Bezzd. Bettr. 30 (1906), p. 297, there cited. 

1 As Wilamowitz puts it, ENAEOIKOSI might mean ἐν δ᾽ ἐοικόσι, or ἢν δὴ 
οἰκῶσι, or ἐν δὲ οἰκοῦσι. See Appendix I. 


304 | THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC XII 


letting him give you the best he has in him, was in my judgement 
an invention of the second half of the fourth century, and would 
have seemed a stark absurdity in the sixth. But apart from that, 
if there was in sixth-century Athens a government strong enough 
and academic enough thus to strangle the poetical powers of the 
bards at the Panathenaea, we know that that government did 
not survive the year 510 B.C. The Tyrants’ authoritative text 
may well have fallen with the Tyrants. 

But have we any right to suppose that the recitation and the 
supposed recension, either or both, were the work of the 
Tyrants? Well, if there were no tradition at all, that is the con- 
jecture most people would make. The Panathenaea was prob- 
ably founded, at the least it was restored in special splendour, 
by Pisistratus. The policy of making Athens the head of Ionia 
was especially that of Pisistratus. And, apart from the Pisi- 
stratidae, the choice is really not large among sixth-century 
statesmen. But, as a matter of fact, we have at this point the 
help of a definite tradition, the oldest trace of it coming from 
Dieuchidas of Megara in the fourth century B.C., the clearest 
from some good authorities of the Roman period. Unfortu- 
nately there is a lacuna in the quotation from Dieuchidas, so we 
do not know what he said. We only know that he somehow 
connected Pisistratus and Solon with the text of Homer. Our 
earliest full witness is Cicero, a particularly well-informed man 
of letters writing in the second great period of ancient scholar- 
ship. He speaks of the literary fame of Pisistratus, ‘ who is said 
to have arranged in their present order the works of Homer, 
which were previously in confusion’. And the tradition is 
mentioned by many writers of the early empire.1 I see that 


* Dintzer, Jahrd. f. Philol. xci, pp. 738 ff., argues that Cicero’s authority 
was Dicaearchus, a first-rate witness. I subjoin the chief texts: cf. Wolf, 
Prolegomena, Cap. Xxxiil. 

Εἰς. de Orat. iii. 34 ‘Quis doctior iisdem illis temporibus, aut cuius 
eloquentia litteris instructior fuisse traditur, quam Pisistrati? qui primus 
Homeri libros, confusos antea, sic disposuisse dicitur, ut nunc habemus.’ 

Pausanias vii. 26. 13 Πεισίστρατος ἔπη τὰ Ὁμήρου διεσπασμένα te καὶ ἄλλα 
ἀλλαχοῦ μνημονευόμενα ἠθροίζετο. 

Vitae Homert IV and V in Westermann, Βιογράφοι (= Allen, V, pp. 245, 248). 

Ta δὲ ποιήματα αὐτοῦ τὰ ἀληθῆ σποράδην πρότερον a όμενα, Πεισίστρατος 
᾿Αθηναῖος συνέταξε. --Περιϊὼν τὰς πόλεις (‘Opnpos) ἦδε Ta ποιήματα" ὕστερον δὲ 
Πεισίστρατος αὐτὰ συνήγαγεν, ὡς τὸ ἐπίγραμμα τοῦτο δηλοῖ, ᾿Αθήνησιν ἐπιγεγραμ- 
μένον ἐν εἰκόνι αὐτοῦ τοῦ Πεισιστράτου" 


XU PISISTRATUS 305 


these writers are called ‘late authorities’. But there is very 
little of our grammatical record that has more ancient credentials : 
a strong tradition in the age of Didymus or Herodian, a faint 
trace in the age before the Alexandrians. 

If we inquire into the probable sources of Cicero and the 
other Romans, the indications point to Crates, the head of the 
Pergamene school and the great rival of Aristarchus. He had 
gone on an embassy to Rome about the year 168 B.C., on behalt 
of Attalus II. We happen to know that—fortunately enough, 
as it turned out—he fell into a drain near the Palatine and broke 
his leg, which detained him in Rome longer than he intended, 
and ‘throughout all the time both of his embassy and his illness 
he gave constant lectures and industriously explained his views’. 
It is perhaps curious that the remains of Aristarchus make no 
mention of Pisistratus, nor of any Attic recension. The remains 
are not nearly full enough to justify us in assuming that he never 
wrote of the question at all. But he had less need than most 
people to speak of it because he held the theory that Homer was 
himself an Athenian, not an Ionian, and that consequently the 
crudest Athenian forms needed no explanation. 

The testimony is not quite uniform. Most of the authorities 
agree with Cicero. One text speaks of Hipparchus, the son ot 
Pisistratus. This is hardly a contradiction: the policy was the 

Tpis pe τυραννήσαντα τοσαυτάκις ἐξεδίωξε 
δῆμος ᾿Ερεχθειδῶν, καὶ τρὶς ἐπεσπάσατο, 

τὸν μέγαν ἐν βουλαῖς Πεισίστρατον" ὃς τὸν Ὅμηρον 
ἤθροισα, “σποράδην τὸ πρὶν ἀειδόμενον. 


ἡμέτερος. γὰρ κεῖνος ὁ χρύσεος ἦν πολιήτης, 
εἴπερ ᾿Αθηναῖοι Σμύρναν ἐπῳκίσαμεν. 


Diog. Laert., i. 57 ra τε Ὁμήρου ἐξ ὑποβολῆς γέγραφε ῥαψῳδεῖσθαι, οἷον ὅπου 
ὁ πρῶτος ἔληξεν ἄρχεσθαι τὸν ἐχόμενον. μᾶλλον οὖν Σόλων Ὅμηρον ἐφώτισεν ἢ ἢ 
Πεισίστρατος, ὥς φησι Διευχίδας ἐν πέμπτῳ Μεγαρικῶν". .. ἦν δὲ μάλιστα τὰ ἔπη 
ταυτί" οἱ δ᾽ ἄρ᾽ ᾿Αθήνας εἶχον καὶ τὰ ἑξῆς. (A well-known Athenian interpolation, 
Β 546 ff.) 

Ps, Plat. Hipparch. Ps 228 B (Ἱππαρχος) τὰ Ὁμήρου ἔπη πρῶτος ἐκόμισεν εἰς 
τὴν “γὴν ταυτηνί, καὶ ἠνάγκασε τοὺς ῥαψῳδοὺς Παναθηναίοις ἐξ ὑπολήψεως ἐφεξῆς 
αὐτὰ διϊέναι, ὦ ὥσπερ νῦν ἔτι οἵδε ποιοῦσιν. 

Aelian, V. ΜΠ. xiii. 14 Ὕστερον Πεισίστρατος συναγαγὼν ἀπέφηνε τὴν ᾿Ιλιάδα καὶ 
τὴν ᾿Οδύσσειαν. 

Suidas, ν. Ὅμηρος: Ἡ Yorepoy συνετέθη καὶ συνετάχθη ὑπὸ πολλῶν, καὶ μάλιστα 
ὑπὸ Πεισιστράτου, τοῦ τῶν ᾿Αθηναίων τυράννου. 

Eustathius p. 5 Ὅτι ἕν μέν τι ,»σῶμα συνεχὲς διόλου καὶ ἐναρμόττον ἡ τῆς 
᾿Ιλιάδος ποιήσις" οἱ δὲ συνθέμενοι ταύτην, Kar’ ἐπιταγήν, ὡς φασι, Πεισιστράτου τοῦ 
τῶν ᾿Αθηναίων τυράννου .. . κατέτεμον αὐτὸ εἰς πολλά (i.e, divided it into books). 

1 Suet. Gramm. et rhet. ii, p. 100. 


2760 x 


306 THE RISE ‘OF THE GREEK BEG XII 


policy of the Pisistratid family. But Dieuchidas says it was Solon 
who ordained the recitation, and ‘thus threw more light on 
Homer than did Pisistratus who .. .’ and there comes the gap in 
the text. The words imply some knowledge of the Pisistratus 
tradition, and apparently some criticism of it, and they attribute 
the recitation law to Solon. On the face of it this does not seem 
probable. In Solon’s time there was very likely no such thing 
as the Panathenaea; pretty certainly there was not yet an 
authoritative Pan-Ionian policy ; and we must remember that the 
name of Solon, as ‘the lawgiver’ Jar excellence, had a habit of 
attracting to it the credit for all good laws whatever.’ 

On the whole, the Pisistratus tradition stands its ground. It is 
by no means certainly true; it is not very clear in its statement. 
But it accords with the general probabilities of history ; it is fully 
as clear as a sober scholar would expect in a tradition about 
mere literary history in an age before the annals of literature 
had begun. And Iam bound to say that the more I study the 
traditions of the good Scholia or the Grammatici of Roman 
times, the less am I inclined to suspect them of gross carelessness 
or wilful invention. In the history of Drama we give credence 
to many texts far later and less strongly attested. In any case, 
the Pisistratus tradition marks the utmost limit of our Homeric 
record. That last little glimpse of firm land may, of course, be 
only an illusion. Beyond it, at any rate, we must steer our best 
on a sea without a shore. 


The study of these great poems is still involved in confused 
and sometimes in curiously bitter controversy. This means, of 
course, that no advanced critic has yet completely solved the 
problem before him ; probably no wise critic ever for a moment 
imagined that he had. It may be that the most helpful solution 
will be something which no one has yet thought of. But in the 
meantime, without expecting agreement about results, we might, 
I think, try to agree about our approach to the Homeric Question. 
We might distinguish the data from the problem. 

1 The romance about the travels of Lycurgus of Sparta, in which he meets 
Thales and Homer and collects the wisdom of the Egyptians and the secrets 
which Rhadamanthys learned from Zeus, ought not by any critical scholar 


to be brought into this connexion. Strabo, p. 482 ; it has the compromising 
support of Heraclides Ponticus, Po/, ii. 2 (=F. H. G,, ii, p. 210). 


XII THE RHAPSODES: ARE A FACT 307 


The Homeric Question can never be solved by starting from 
the question, Who was Homer and when did he live? ‘ Homer’ 
is a hypothesis and not even a clear hypothesis. The //ad and 
Odyssey are known facts, and it is from the facts that we should 
start. The /zad and Odyssey are two poems dealing with 
ancient heroic material selected for public recitation in Athens at 
the great festival of the Panathenaea, at or just about the founda- 
tion of that festival by Pisistratus, and after that time regularly 
recited every four years during the classical period. So much 
we can say with reasonable certainty, without going beyond 
the bounds of our evidence; and if we grasp this first fact firmly 
we shall find a great deal of light thrown upon many remoter 
problems, 

We have seen that the Homeric poems ‘and no others’! were 
recited at the great Panathenaea in the generations before and after 
Plato. Weare definitely told that Pisistratus was the founder of 
the great Panathenaea, and have evidence” to the effect that 
either Pisistratus, or his son Hipparchus—who was much given 
to poetry and the arts—instituted the recitation, and fixed the 
order in which the poems were to be recited. Before that the 
poems were ‘preserved by memory’, and were ‘different in 
different places’, so that Pisistratus may be said to have 
‘arranged in their present order the books of Homer which 
before were in confusion’. 

The law commanded the poems ‘ ῥαψῳδεῖσθαι᾽, to be ‘ treated 
by rhapsodes ’, and the word rhapsode was generally interpreted 
as a ‘song-stitcher’ or, in Pindar’s paraphrase, a ‘singer of 
stitched lays’. That is, the songs or lays were already in 
existence, but the rhapsode ‘stitched them together ’ into wholes, 
longer or shorter according to the occasion and the time avyail- 
able. These lay-stitchers were also called Homeridae, ‘ sons of 
Homer’, or Homeristae, ‘ Homerizers’, and presumably specialized 
in the works of their ‘divine ancestor’. But it needed a very 
special effort of lay-stitching to produce out of their old epic 
material unities so large and finely knit as the /éad and 
Odyssey. 

That the 7zad and Odyssey, and not the 7hedsazs or the poems 
of the so-called Cycle, were the ‘ Homeric Poems’ selected for 
1 But see below, p. 309. 3 See p. 304 f. note. 

x 2 


308 THE: RISE OF THE “GREEK EFIC XII 


the Panathenaea, may be taken as practically certain! And the 
selection of these two poems for the Panathenaea seems to be 
the simplest explanation of their survival, in complete form, when 
all the rest of the abundant epic literature perished. Lastly, 
this hypothesis alone seems to explain the otherwise astonishing 
fact that Attic tragedy, while drawing almost all its material from 
the heroic saga, carefully abstains from using the /é@ad and 
Odyssey. These two poems were performed at the Panathenaea ; 
consequently the performances at the Dionysia had to take other 
subjects. 

It is quite possible that the name is actually preserved of the 
chief rhapsode who worked up the 7/ad and Odyssey into their 
present shape. There is a note by a certain Hippostratus, 
a chronicler of the Alexandrian age, quoted in the valuable 
scholia to Pindar, Vemea 2, 1. ‘The name Homeridae was 
first applied to Homer’s descendants who performed his poems 
in succession to him in Chios, but afterwards to other rhapsodes 
who did not claim descent from Homer. Distinguished among 
them was the school of Kynaithos (of περὶ Κύναιθον), who are 
said to have interpolated much of their composition into Homer's 
poetry. Kynaithos was a Chian, and is supposed to have made 
the Hymn to Apollo which bears Homer’s name. This 
Kynaithos was the first person to perform (ῥαψῳδεῖν) Homer's 
poems at Syracuse about the 69th Olympiad (504 B.C.).’ 

I am disposed to think that this is probably true. Kynaithos 
‘made’ the Hymn to Apollo in the sense in which Athenaeus 
speaks of ‘all those who have made the Heracleza’; that is, he 
did a poetical version, a ποίησιν, of it. If ‘much’ of our Homer 
is the ‘composition’ of him and his school, perhaps it was they 
who put together for Pisistratus the present shape of the /Zad 
and Odyssey. When the Pisistratidae fell, in 510 B.C., Kynaithos 
sought refuge elsewhere, and in a few years’ time is found 
reciting at Syracuse, doubtless at some great festival, the 
Itiad and Odyssey which he had once recited for Pisistratus. 
In this he was doing the normal work of a rhapsode, though 
a specially distinguished example of it. For, as the same 
scholion proceeds to say: ‘ At a time when the poetry of Homer 
was not yet brought into one body, but dispersed, variable, and 


1 See above, p. 300. 


XII PANEGYRIS-POEMS 309 


divided in parts, the rhapsodes who produced it at performances 
did something equivalent to “ joining ” and “ stitching” when they 
brought it into a unity. That is how Pindar understands the 
word.’ And a little later: ‘They knew by heart and repeated 
the poetry of Homer in its scattered state ; and they did great 
violence to it’—that is, altered it greatly as they worked it up 
into new unities. 

We saw above that this action of Pisistratus falls excellently 
into line with his general policy. He wished ,to assert the 
claim of Athens to be the Mother-City of all the Ionians and the 
champion of Hellas against the Orient. It is significant that the 
only poem which ever received the glory of being recited, or 
read aloud, at the Panathenaea together with Homer was the 
Perséts, or epic of the Persian War, by Choirilos.1 And, 
secondly, he wished to make Athens the centre of Jonian 
culture in place of Miletus and the other Ionian cities which had 
recently fallen a prey to Croesus of Lydia (about 560 B.C.). 
The Panathenaea served both ends. 

This, then, is the recorded history, in itself consistent and 
credible. Is it of any help towards understanding the /Zad and 
Odyssey? ἴῃ the first place it solves the most pressing of all the 
problems : it tells us at last what the two poems are. They are 
not court-poems, nor yet folk-poems: they are panégyris-poems, 
a kind which does not exist anywhere outside Greece. The 
puzzle has always been to understand what the /éad and 
Odyssey were meant for, or how such immense poems came to 
be composed. To be read? But there was no reading public ; 
and the tradition always speaks of them as ‘sung’ or recited. 
To be recited as wholes? But, by ordinary standards, they are 
enormously too long. To be recited in bits, like lays? But they 
do not fall apart into lays. One of the most certain results of 
Homeric criticism since Lachmann is that all attempts to divide 
the poems into recitable lays have ended in complete failure. 
The “ας and Odyssey are unities ; elaborate, well-constructed 
unities, composed with infinite pains out of discrepant materials. 
All those pains were not only wasted but were positively self- 
defeating if the poet’s object was to recite his poem in parts 
round the camp-fire or in the banquet-hall. If he had to do 


1 The Perséis σὺν τοῖς ‘Opnpov ἀναγιγνώσκεσθαι ἐψηφίσθη. Suidas, 5. v. Χοιρίλος. 


310 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC XII 


that, it was lays he wanted: lays about the length of an ordinary 
tragedy, those very lays in fact which he had just spoiled in build- 
ing his two great works of art! The two facts given us are: 
first, that the “ας is a poem originally meant for recitation ; 
second, that it does not fall into separate lays and that the whole 
would take some twenty-four hours to recite. Conclusion: the 
poem must be intended for some extraordinary occasion, demand- 
ing even greater enthusiasm and powers of endurance than the 
annual celebrations of tragedy at the Dionysia. 

The same consideration solves another of the principal 
problems over which controversy has raged since the time ct 
Wolf. The old practice, still largely current, was to divide 
Homeric critics into Unitarians and Separatists. It was a wrong 
division; because both views are right. The poems are unities ; 
while various parts of the unity are discrepant in substance, and 
divergent in date and style. For several generations Homeric 
scholars tried to treat this problem by supposing that the unity 
came first and the discrepancies were ‘ late additions’ or ‘inter- 
polations’. There was an original poem of manageable length 
by ‘Homer’, containing no flaws or contradictions ; then came 
interpolating rhapsodes and diaskeuasts, added to it and spoiled 
it. The method may be seen at its best in Dr. Leaf’s great 
commentary. But even at its best it has always failed. For one 
thing, no amount of excision has ever resulted in producing the 
required uncorrupted poem, not even if allowance is made for 
supposed omissions. For another, it has generally been possible 
to show that wherever a passage was inconsistent with the rest 
of the poem conscious pains have been taken to explain away or 
bind together the discordances.! Again, it was often difficult to 
understand the motive of an ‘interpolator ’ in adding something 
of his own which simply made trouble. For these and other 
reasons, scholars have been driven to try the alternative 
hypothesis: that the discrepant versions were there first, and the 
unity has been imposed upon them by the ‘song-stitcher’. It is 
not a new hypothesis. It is simply that described in the scholia 
to Pindar, The ‘ work of Homer ’—and all epic poetry was the 


e.g. the scruple of Diomede in Z 129 lest Glaucus should be a god, after 
the assurance of Athena in E 124-32. See the long note by Porphyry in 
Schol. Ven. B. 


ἘΠ UNITY IMPOSED ON DIVERSE MATERIAL ΠῚ 


work of Homer—was ‘scattered’ and ‘different in different 
places’, recited from memory by ‘ Homeridae’; and the song- 
stitchers put them together, ‘ doing great violence to the poems’ 
in the process. 

For example, Book I of the //ad, in which Agamemnon 
beseeches Achilles to accept atonement and is refused, seems 
inconsistent with certain statements and situations, especially 
in Book II, which imply that Agamemnon had made no such 
offer. If we say that Book I is a ‘later addition’, we do not 
explain at all why the maker of the addition should go out of 
his way to compose a lay contradictory to the rest of the poem. 
But if we suppose that the ‘song-stitcher’ found in his store 
some good material which implied one situation and some which 
implied another slightly different, and that both versions were 
good in themselves and both already dear to parts of his 
audience, it is only natural that he should wish to use both. 
Again, in our present Odyssey there isa motive twice repeated 
in which the disguised Odysseus is injuriously treated by one of 
his own servants. In one part, o and 7,! the treacherous servant 
is a maid Melantho, daughter of Dolios; in another,? p, v, and ᾿ 
especially ¢ and y, it is a man, Melanthios or Melantheus, son of 
Dolios. The Melantho part never mentions Melanthios; the 
Melanthios part never mentions Melantho, not even when it 
comes to the hanging of the wicked handmaids in x 470 ff. It is 
surely most unlikely that one is original Homer, and the other a 
‘late addition’. Who would deliberately add such a monotonous 
doublet? If both were varying versions, current in different 
schools or in the stock of the same school of poets, one can 
readily see how the stitcher took in both, and sewed them 
together.® 

On the other great problems also light is thrown by the same 
conception : they all show new use of old material. The Homeric 

1 & 321-40, τ 65-92. 

2 p 247, 3693 v 173, 255; 176, 181, 212, 265; x 142, 152, 159, 161, 182, 
Pre same way there are three cases where Odysseus has something 
thrown at him by the suitors: in p 462 Antinoos hits him hard with a stool 
(θρῆνυς), in.o 394 Eurymachus misses him, but fells a cupbearer, with a stool 
(oédus), in v 299 Ktesippus misses him with a cow’s foot. The passages do 


not form a climax and seem to have no relation to one another. Independent 
stories have apparently been combined, 


312 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC XII 


language is very old Greek, some of it actually unintelligible to 
Attic ears, worked over and over by Ionic and Attic rhapsodes, 
or in the last instance by Ionic rhapsodes and Attic copyists. 
The Homeric culture and civilization are not the naive presenta- 
tions of a primitive age by a primitive poet, but the conscious 
descriptions of an idealized heroic age. by one to whom that age 
is far past. This is proved by the fact that various modern 
objects are mentioned in similes, but not in the body of the poem 
(p. 121 f.). And this heroic past as described in Homer has two 
marked characteristics, which at first sight seem contradictory : 
it shows, with some lapses, remarkable unity and consistency, as 
if it were the description of a real historic age, and, on the other 
hand, it entirely refuses to correspond with any historical age 
known to us. It is not Minoan or Mycenaean; it is not, within 
the limits of our knowledge, post-Mycenaean. It is an idealized 
past, when men were heroes and lived, ate, dressed and talked as 
heroes should. The unity is not an original fact, marred and 
confused by subsequent interpolations ; it is a unity subsequently 
imposed on confused materials by conscious art. 

The amount of Attic influence actually visible in the poems 
has been variously estimated. It seems to me just what one 
might expect: quite comparable, except in the matter of dialect, 
to the amount that is visible in such a purely Attic creation as 
tragedy. In tragedy for the most part we find the great myths 
of the heroic tradition treated simply for their artistic value: 
Agamemnon, Orestes, Oedipus, Ajax, Heracles are not made 
into material for patriotic propaganda any more than Hamlet is 
by Shakespeare. At the most we find a few local Attic myths 
chosen as subjects, one or two praises of Athens in the choral 
odes, an occasional appearance of Theseus where a non- 
Athenian poet might not have thought of him. 

Even the dialect shows more than the mere mistakes of Attic 
copyists. Forms such as ἥλιος by ἠέλιος, ἕπεσθαι by ὀπάζειν, 
ὅπως &c. for Aeolic ὀκκ- and Ionic ὀκ- : ἁμόθεν ye, βεβῶσα, ἧντο, 
ἐκεῖντο seem to reveal the hand of Attic poets. And is it not 
significant to meet the form ἑωσφόρος in the description of 
a dawn which ‘7zses over the sea’? Significant also that in the 
Odyssey in its present form the adventures of Odysseus are 
turned into a contest between Poseidon and Athena, a contest 


XII ATTIC INFLUENCE 313 


which forms one of the most central and characteristic of Athenian 
myths, and, as in the Attic myth, Athena is the true friend and 
has the best of it; that Athena is extraordinarily prominent in 
what seem to be the later parts of the poem, so that Odysseus is, 
as it were, annexed by the Athenian Koré; that a sympathetic 
minor character who protects and helps Telemachus is actually 
called ‘ Pisistratus’ and is made the son of the aged Nestor—from 
whom Pisistratus of Athens claimed descent; that, in order to 
prevent any mistake, when Athena leaves Odysseus and goes 
home, we are told that she flies straight off to the ‘ strong House 
of Erechtheus’—in which she lived on the Athenian acropolis! 
Such instances can be multiplied. 

It is the same with the //ad. Take, for example, the 
Catalogue of Ships in B. By general agreement that is a docu- 
ment of respectable antiquity, not composed for its present place, 
but inserted there at some time when the //zad was nearly 
complete, and by additions, omissions, and alterations, accommo- 
dated to its surroundings. If we compare it with the rest of the 
Itad, taken as a whole, two classes of peculiarity strike us. 
First, there are peculiarities of origin. It is in the style of the 
Boeotian school, and magnifies the Boeotians; it also divides 
Greece on a principle quite different from that usual in the poem. 
Then, secondly, there are peculiarities of revision: additions 
made to the original text or omissions from it. If we consider 
the spurious additions, most of them are merely editor's alterations 
to fit the Catalogue into its context, but some are markedly 
Athenian. There is the startling statement that Menestheus, the 
obscure Athenian chief, was the best general, for both horse and 
foot, in the whole Greek army; the significant single line, 
covering apparently a large omission, which states that Ajax, the 
hero of Salamis, drew up his ships among those of the Athenians. 
Salamis had just been conquered and annexed by Athens in the 
time of Pisistratus. 

The omissions, so far as we can trace them, point the same 
way: Thebes, Aegina, Megara are omitted entirely ; Salamis is 
suppressed, Corinth belittled. These five cities are the principal 
enemies of Athens, It is also worth noticing that in the account 


1 ἑωσφύρος Ψ 226, cf. 2 12. See Ρ. 191 ἢ. Erechtheum ἡ 80f: Pisistratus 
y 36 ff. ἃς. 


314 THE RISE OF THE GREEK MPIC XII 


of the Athenian contingent no town in Attica is mentioned 
except Athens. There is no word of Eleusis or Marathon or 
Acharnae or Brauron: that must be the work of an Athenian, 
writing long after the synoikismos of Attica. The result is 
much what might be expected—except indeed by those who 
talk always of Attic ‘forgeries’ and ‘Athenian vanity’ and 
imagine that those are the motives by which great poetry is 
produced. The Athenian colour is present, but it is not gross 
or crude. One handsome mention of the troops of Athens, and 
some not very conspicuous silences about the glories of her 
principal enemies, 

There is one further difficulty which is solved, or greatly 
reduced, if once we grasp the circumstances of the Panathenaic 
Recitation. If the text of the //ad and Odyssey was fixed by 
Pisistratus, and an official copy written out in the official script,! 
how comes it that the text fluctuated so greatly afterwards? 
How, for instance, can we account for the great divergences 
between our text and Aristotle’s or Aeschines’ quotations, and 
the ‘wildness’ of the early papyri? Let us remember that the 
Pisistratean text was made for a great recitation, which occurred 
only once every four years. Such a recitation would influence 
but could not dominate the ordinary tradition, which would 
continue to be formed by the frequent everyday recitations or 
public readings of Homer, in lays or episodes or extracts. The 
complete continuous text would not become impressed on 
people’s minds until two influences had time to work: the 
teaching in boys’ schools and the rise of an educated reading 
public. It is quite conceivable, though not very probable, that 
the Vulgate Text of Homer is really an attempted restoration of 
the Pisistratean. But at least we can see why that text was not 
likely to fix immediately the text of the ordinary recitations. 

We may observe two further consequences that flow from a 
clear acceptance of this tradition. It changes the Homeric 
Question from a question of genuine and spurious, of original and 
interpolated, to a question of Sources. All poems have sources : 
and all poems in nations where there is no widespread reading 
public are apt to use their sources just as they please, with no 
scruples about what we call ‘originality’ or ‘literary property’. 

1 See above, p. 302 f. 


XII RESEARCH AND POETRY B15 


The rhapsodes of our Ziad and Odyssey used the Thebars and 
the oszoz without disguise or shame, as doubtless the rhapsodes 
of the Zhebazs or the Nostoz used their /zad and Odyssey. 
This simplifies in one way the process of criticism, while on the 
other hand it makes necessary much greater caution in using the 
poems as historical documents. There has been, and still is, a 
regrettable tendency among historians to use any part of the 
poems, unless it is definitely condemned as ‘spurious’ or ‘a late 
addition’, as being ‘real Homer’, and therefore a first-hand 
authority of about the tenth century B.C. This must be given 
up. We can only say of any average Homeric statement: 
‘This was accepted in the sixth century B.C. as belonging to 
the Heroic Tradition’; though, of course, in certain cases we 
can proceed to argue about its original date. One is reminded 
of the problems of Deuteronomy. A sober critic no longer 
treats Deuteronomy as a work written by Moses but interpolated 
by the priests who ‘ found it in the Temple’ in the year 621 B.C. 
He treats it as a work ‘ found’ in the year 621, which contains 
ancient material from different sources, both Hebrew and 
Babylonian. 

And the beauty of the poetry? Is that affected one way or 
another? I confess that, as explained in Chapter XI, the beauty 
of the /Zad as poetry has to me that touch of the infinite, that 
strictly incomparable quality which results when a beautiful 
object is confessedly imperfect and inevitably suggests a beauty 
beyond itself. ‘Thus I deliver my message, but ah, if you had 
heard my master!’ I have noticed that readers of Homer who 
have no theories of their own have the habit of freely ‘ thinking 
away’ pieces which they do not like—Athena’s treachery in 
Itad X for example, or the superfluous transformations and 
re-transformations of Odysseus in the later books of the Odyssey. 
There is an instinctive sense that the real poem is somehow 
more perfect and beautiful than this version that we happen to 
have; perhaps the same instinct that sent all the early critics 
searching for spurious lines which were ‘unworthy of Homer’. 
And it is a perfectly sound instinct. I do not suggest that, if we 
had all the library of Kynaithos open before us and all his 
memory as well, we should find any given version which would 
satisfy us as being absolutely complete and uncorrupted Homer, 


316 THE RISE OF THE GREEK EPIC ΧΙ 


Any traditional poem or drama—whatever may be true of an 
‘ original’ one—exists only in a series of performances or versions, 
each of which is an attempt to represent better and better an 
ideal which is never reached. This is no high aesthetic doctrine, 
but plain fact. Ham/et only exists to the full when performed ; 
yet Hamlet is obviously something much greater than any 
particular performance by Garrick or Irving or, for that matter, 
by Burbage and Shakespeare. The //ad is greater than any 
given version of the 7 σα. Kynaithos, let us say, did his best ; 
and Kynaithos was evidently a brilliant poet with a wide know- 
ledge of the epic literature. But Kynaithos knew that nothing 
that he could re-create could ever be the full thing that was meant. 
And it seems as if some effluence of that knowledge still reached 
us as we read, and as if the rhapsode had thereby added to the poem 
something which could not have been present in any really original 
work by a self-conscious creator. He has added to it that touch 
of spiritual hunger which creates a beauty beyond visible beauty. 
Whether ‘Homeros’ is a mythical ancestor of poets, like 
Amphictyon or Hellen, or whether there was once a bard called 
‘Homeros’ who acquired a mythical reputation, the Homer to 
whom Kynaithos ascribed the //ad and Odyssey, but a more 
perfect /éad and Odyssey than could ever afterwards be 
recovered, belongs now to the company of his own heroes, not 
born in Chios or Athens or Smyrna, but ὧν del ἐν οὐρανίῳι τόπφι. 


APPENDIX A 


THE PHARMAKOI AND HUMAN SACRIFICE 


As there has been a tendency of late, perhaps started by Rohde 
(Psyche, p. 367, n. 4), to make out that the pharmakos rite was a real 
human sacrifice in the full sense, it may be well to give verbatim the 
more important texts on which Rohde based his opinion. 


I. Anctent Texts. 


(2) Hipponax, several fragments: especially 


4. πόλιν καθαίρειν καὶ κράδῃσι βάλλεσθαι. 

5. βάλλοντες ἐν λειμῶνι καὶ ῥαπίζοντες 
κράδῃσι καὶ σκίλλῃσιν, ὥσπερ φαρμακόν. 

6. δεῖ δ᾽ αὐτὸν ἐς φαρμακὸν ἐκποιήσασθαι. 

7. κἄφη παρέξειν ἰσχάδας τε καὶ μᾶζαν 
καὶ τυρὸν οἷον ἐσθίουσι φαρμακοί. 

9. λιμῷ γένηται ξηρός, ἐν δὲ τῷ θυμῷ 
φαρμακὸς ἀχθεὶς ἑπτάκις ῥαπισθείη. 

37. ὃ δ᾽ ἐξολισθὼν ἱκέτευε τὴν κράμβην 
τὴν ἑπτάφυλλον, ἣν [7 Μ55.] θύεσκε Πανδώρῃ, 
Ταργηλίοισιν ἔγχυτον πρὸ φαρμακοῦ. 


These in any case prove nothing about Athens. Hipponax was over 
a century earlier than Aristophanes, and Ephesus was a town much 
exposed to barbarian influences. But, even as to sixth-century Ephesus, 
the fragments prove only: (1) that the Pharmakos-sacrifice was a known 
ceremony, as for instance, breaking on a wheel, hanging, drawing, and 
quartering, &c., are known to us, but that Hipponax λας to explain tt. 
(2) That some ceremony or other still went on which could be described 
as a ‘beating of the pharmakoi’, like our own burning of Guy Fawkes. 
(3) It is worth remarking that all these phrases seem to occur in one 
context, and the same is true of the passages in Attic Comedy. They 
are all comic or rhetorical curses. Now in such curses it is on all 
grounds more comic, and more effective, to invoke an obsolete and 
imaginative punishment on your victim. The curses in Aristophanes 
illustrate this. (Those invoked £9. 928 ff., Ach. 1156 ff., or the threats 
of Ran. 473 ff. have nothing to do with real life.) (4) No fragment 


318 APPENDIX A 


speaks of killing a pharmakos, and fr. 37, obscure as it is, speaks quite 
clearly of the dough figure in place of a pharmakos. “Eyyvtov = ‘a cake 
in a mould’; one of the regular substitutes for a real victim. 

(4) Aristophanes, Ranae, 732 οἷσιν ἡ πόλις πρὸ Tod | οὐδὲ φαρμακοῖσιν 
εἰκῇ ῥᾳδίως ἐχρήσατ᾽ av. This merely shows knowledge of the existence 
of such a custom πρὸ τοῦ, ‘once upon a time.’ 

(c) £9. 1135 ff. τούσδ᾽... ὥσπερ δημοσίους τρέφεις ... εἶτα... θύσας 
ἐπιδειπνεῖς. It is strange that any one should take this as evidence for 
a pharmakos-sacrifice. Who would ‘cook and dine on’ a pharmakos ? 
The Scholiast (V) explains rightly that δημόσιοι are animals kept and 
fattened at the public expense. 

(4) Eupolis, Demoi, 120 (K): 


ἃ “~ yy e /, 3 Led > ’, 
ον χρὴν EV τε ταις τριόδοις καν τοις ὀξυθυμίοις 


προστρόπαιον τῆς πόλεως κάεσθαι τετριγότα. 


Merely a comic curse; perhaps a literary reminiscence οἵ Hipponax. 
In any case it proves nothing about contemporary practice. 

(e) Lysias vi. 53. ‘The right thing would be ἀπαλλαττομένους 
᾿Ανδοκίδον τὴν πόλιν καθαίρειν καὶ ἀποδιοπομπεῖσθαι καὶ φαρμακὸν 
aroméumew’.—Comic abuse, as before. But observe that Lysias thinks 
of the pharmakos not as killed, but as ‘sent away ’, or banished. 


II. Explanations of Grammarians. 


A. Much the oldest, Ister: in Harpocration, s.v. φαρμακός. Avo 
ἄνδρας ᾿Αθήνησιν ἐξῆγον, καθάρσια ἐσομένους THs πόλεως ἐν τοῖς Θαργηλίοις, 
ἕνα μὲν ὑπὲρ τῶν ἀνδρῶν ἕνα δὲ ὑπὲρ τῶν γυναικῶν. [Originally a man 
named Pharmakos had stolen cups from Apollo and ὑπὸ τῶν περὶ τὸν 
᾿Αχιλλέα κατελεύσθη.] καὶ τὰ τοῖς Θαργηλίοις ἀγόμενα τούτων ἀπομιμή- 
pata ἐστιν. Ἴστρος ἐν a τῶν ᾿Απόλλωνος ἐπιφανειῶν. 

Observe: they did not ‘kill’, they ‘led out’ two people in ἃ 
procession ; and the ceremony was an ‘7zmd¢ation’ of stoning to death. 
Such ‘imitation’ ceremonies were as common as can be in Greece. 
(On the Achilles question see Lecture VIII on Thersites.) 

B. Helladius, af. Phot. δώ, 1593 ἔθος ἣν ἐν ᾿Αθήναις φαρμακοὺς 
ἄγειν δύο, τὸν μὲν ὑπὲρ ἀνδρῶν τὸν δὲ ὑπὲρ γυναικῶν πρὸς καθαρμὸν 
ἀγομένους. καὶ ὃ μὲν τῶν ἀνδρῶν μελαίνας ἰσχάδας περὶ τὸν τράχηλον εἶχεν, 
λευκὰς δ᾽ ἅτερος" σύβακχοι δέ, φησίν, ὠνομάζοντο. It was an ἀποτροπιασμὸς 
νόσων in atonement for the death of Androgeos the Cretan. 

This writer agrees with Ister, except that he does not happen to add 
that it was a μίμημαις He probably took that for granted. The 
imitation cannot have been very close, one would think, if some took it 


THE PHARMAKOI AND HUMAN SACRIFICE 319 


for a stoning, others for banishment, others for burning. Androgeos 
was killed in an ambush on the road to Thebes. We may conjecture 
that he in some way βαλλόμενος ἀπέθανε. This would give the stoning, 
with κράδαι and σκίλλαι : then the banishment would be the running 
away of the real man; the burning would be the burning of the ἔγχυτον 
or effigy. 

C. Tzetzes on the Hipponax passages: Tzetz. C/z7. v. 726, in case of 
special calamity, τὸν πάντων ἀμορφότερον ἦγον ὡς πρὸς θυσίαν" | εἰς 
τόπον δὲ τὸν πρόσφορον στήσαντες τὴν θυσίαν | τυρόν τε δόντες τῇ χερὶ καὶ 
μᾶζαν καὶ ἰσχάδας, | ἑπτάκις γὰρ ῥαπίσαντες ἐκεῖνον εἰς τὸ πέος | 
σκίλλαις' συκαῖς ἀγρίαις τε καὶ ἄλλοις τῶν ἀγρίων, | τέλος πυρὶ 
κατέκαιον ἐν ξύλοις τοῖς ἀγρίοις. | καὶ τὸν σποδὸν εἰς θάλασσαν ἔρραινον εἰς 
ἀνέμους. ὃ δὲ Ἱππῶναξ κτλ. (fr. 4-9). 

I do not feel sure what object Tzetzes meant to be supplied to 
κατέκαιον. Did they burn ‘him’ or only ‘it’, sc. τὴν θυσίαν, i.e. the 
ἔγχυτον or effigy? It seems to be distinguished from ἐκεῖνον, the man 
who ‘was led out’ ὡς ἐπὶ θυσίαν, ‘as though to sacrifice’. But perhaps 
Tzetzes did not really understand the source which he was quoting: he 
seldom did, being an inaccurate writer, and 1500 years later. So far, 
then, there is no single statement that the pharmakoi even at Ephesus, 
much less at Athens, were really sacrificed. But now we have two such 
statements. 

(a2) Schol. Zgwizes, 1.c. The first part of the note given in the best 
MSS. explains quite rightly δημοσίους" λείπει Bods ἢ ταύρους. The second 
says ἔτρεφον γάρ twas ᾿Αθηναῖοι λίαν ἀγεννεῖς Kal ἀχρήστους Kal ἐν καιρῷ 
συμφορᾶς τινος ἐπελθούσης τῇ πόλει, λοιμοῦ λέγω ἢ τοιούτου τινός, ἔθυον 
τούτους ἕνεκα τοῦ καθαρθῆναι τοῦ μιάσματος. And presumably ate them, 
as we remarked above! 

This note (1) is absent from R and V, the two good sources: 
(2) shows itself by its language as belonging to a bad period of scholia, 
e.g. the λοιμοῦ, λέγω, ἢ τοιούτου τινός: (3) is obviously wrong as an 
explanation of the passage to which it refers. 

(The note in the good MSS. runs: λείπει Bods ἢ ταύρους ἢ ἄλλο τι 
τοιοῦτον θῦμα. | δημοσίους δὲ τοὺς λεγομένους φαρμακοὺς οἵπερ καθαίρουσι 
τὰς πόλεις τῷ ἑαυτῶν φόνῳ" | ἢ τοὺς δημοσίᾳ καὶ ὑπὸ τῆς πόλεως τρεφομένους. 
Of these three explanations, the first is obviously right. The second, 
‘the so-called pharmakot, who cleanse cities with their blood’, is quite 
vague, as well as wrong. It also occurs in Suidas, and probably did 
not begin life as a note on this passage. The third is right as far as it 
goes. 


? Probably not the garden squill, but the wild bulb. 


320 APPENDIX A 
(4) Schol. Ranae, 733, one inferior MS., C, has a note: τοὺς yap 


φαύλους καὶ παρὰ τῆς φύσεως ἐπιβουλευομένους εἰς ἀπαλλαγὴν αὐχμοῦ ἢ 
λιμοῦ ἡ τινος τῶν τοιούτων ἔθυον, οὺς ἐκάλουν καθάρματα. Exactly what 
one expects in inferior scholia which abbreviate their sources! He says 
ἔθυον for short, because he was careless. He may have found ἐξῆγον ἐπὶ 
θυσίαν or ἦγον ὡς ἐπὶ θυσίαν. It is not necessarily false as it stands, 
since no subject or date is given to ἔθυον ; but even if it said ἔθυον τότε 
ot ᾿Αθηναῖοι it would be worthless. 

The general result is to show that (1) the ancient texts all come to 
the same type: ‘He ought to be tied on a cart and burnt in a bonfire 
like a Guy.’ They imply that a pharmakos-sacrifice was known to have 
existed at some time somewhere: they suggest that some μίμημα of it 
lived on. 

(2) The best grammatical tradition explains that this μίμημα did exist, 
and partly what it was like. 

(3) The worst and latest grammatical tradition, dropping the qualify- 
ing clauses as its manner is, says that ‘they sacrificed very ugly people’. 

Even without the general considerations of probability advanced in 
the text of Lecture I, this evidence clearly points to the Thargelia 
ceremony being a μίμημα. [Cf. also Stengel in Hermes, xxii. 86 ff., and 
especially Farnell, Cud¢s, iv. 270 ff.] 


We give in full the Pelopidas story, which has actually been used as 
evidence that the Greeks of the fourth century had no objection to 
human sacrifice. 

Plutarch, Pe/opidas, xxi. (Before the battle of Leuctra, 371 B.c. 
Pelopidas was encamped near the grave of certain Virgins who had 
been, according to the tradition, violated by Lacedaemonians. They 
had died, and their father had committed suicide upon their grave. A 
fearful and haunted place !) 

‘Pelopidas dreamed that he saw the Virgins wailing about their tombs 
and uttering curses upon the Spartans, and their father commanding 
him to sacrifice to the Virgins a fair-haired Maiden if he wished to 
conquer the enemy. The shocking and unlawful (δεινὸν καὶ παράνομον) 
command started him from his sleep, and he consulted his prophets and 
officers. One party insisted that the dream should not be neglected or 
disobeyed, producing precedents from ancient times, Menoikeus, son of 
Creon, and Macaria, daughter of Heracles’ [both of these devoted 
themselves voluntarily], ‘and in a later generation Pherekydes the wise, 
who was flayed by the Lacedaemonians and his skin preserved by the 
kings, according to a certain oracle’ [a mythical divine king, like 


THE PHARMAKOI AND HUMAN SACRIFICE 321 


Frazer’s Marsyas], ‘and Leonidas, who in a sense sacrificed himself for 
Hellas by the command of an oracle, and further the men sacrificed by 
Themistocles before Salamis to Dionfsus Oméstes. These actions had 
all been approved by subsequent success. On the other hand, Agésilaus 
had led an army from the same place as Agamemnon and against the 
same enemies; the goddess demanded of him the sacrifice of his 
daughter, and he saw the vision while sleeping at Aulis, but refused, 
and through softness disbanded the expedition, which was inglorious 
and incomplete. 

‘The others opposed such a view. No superior and more than 
human beings could be pleased with so barbarous and unlawful a sacri- 
fice. It was not the legendary Typhons and Giants who ruled the 
world, but one who was a Father of all gods and men. As for spirits 
(δαίμονες) who rejoiced in the blood and slaughter of men, to believe in 
such beings at all was probably folly, but if they existed, they should be 
disregarded, as having no power. Weakness and badness of nature 
(ψυχή) was the only soil in which such monstrous and cruel desires 
could grow and last.’ 

The arguments on both sides are interesting, The first set shows 
what was possible to reactionary and superstitious individuals at a time 
of great fear. The others speak the language of ordinary philosophic 
Hellenism. 


APPENDIX: B 
TORTURE OF SLAVE WITNESSES 


Tuts bad business is sometimes misunderstood and grossly overstated. 
The torture of witnesses who are suspected of concealing important 
facts has only in comparatively recent times been abolished in England 
and France. In Athens this sort of torture was forbidden in the case 
of freemen, but not in the case of slaves. To say that a slave could 
not give evidence at all except under torture is absurd. He could of 
course give evidence to a simple fact, e. g. where he witnessed a murder. 
And, in a complicated case, Isaeus, Phi/oct. 16, seems to speak of a 
proclamation inviting evidence from relations or slaves. The cases 
where a slave’s evidence was not good except under torture were those 
where the slave had an obvious interest, such as personal complicity or 
fear of his master. The typical case is where a man is accused of some 
misdoing which his household must have known about. In such a case 
the Court cannot seize his slaves and examine them without the 


2760 Y 


322 APPENDIX B 


master’s consent; but the Accuser can challenge him to hand them 
over for examination under torture. The master, if he accepts this 
proposal, can stipulate what tortures are to be used; and if the Court 
inflicts any permanent injury or any temporary loss of working power on 
the slave, the Court, or the Accuser, as the case may be, has to pay 
damages. ΤῸ Roman or mediaeval torturers such a stipulation would 
have made the whole proceeding nugatory. 

It is worth observing that: (1) This challenge seems generally to 
have been refused. (2) To accept it implied not only a consciousness 
of innocence, but a strange confidence in the affection of your slaves. 
One would expect a slave in such a situation to accuse his master of 
everything that was desired, especially as he could acquire freedom 
thereby, if his evidence was believed. (3) I can find no case mentioned 
where a witness died under torture. Where torture is really severe such 
cases seem to be frequent, from heart failure and other causes. On the 
other hand, the Christian use of the word martyr, witness, is terribly 
significant. ΤῸ poor folk in Roman times a witness meant one who 
suffered; but, of course, it was implied that the witness refused to 
betray his master. 

It looks as if this was one of the numerous cases in which Attic Law 
preserved in the letter an extremely ancient power which was not much 
used, or at any rate not to its full extent. (The scene in /rogs 620 ff. 
is perhaps instructive. It is unpleasant and of course unjust, but does 


not suggest much real cruelty.) The article Servws in Smith’s Dect. 
Antig. seems very sound. 


AEN DDC 
THE THALASSOCRATS 


THERE is extant a very curious and ancient Greek document which 
throws some light directly on this Dark Age which followed the fall of 
the Aegean empires and indirectly on the growth of the Epos. It is a 
list of the various powers which have exercised what the Greeks called 
‘Thalassocratia’, or Rule of the Seas, from the fall of Troy up to the 
founding of the Athenian League. The list is given by Eusebius with 
slight omissions and discrepancies, both in the Chronographia and the 
Canones, and was taken by him from Diodorus.’ It bears well the tests 


" See the historical reconstruction by J. L. Myres in J. 17. S. xxvi. 1; also 
Fotheringham’s criticism in 7. 27. S. xxvii and Myres’ answer. Winckler’s 
discussion is in Der Alte Orient, vol. vii, part 2. 


THE THALASSOCRATS 323 


that have been applied to it, and seems to be drawn from authentic 
sources, perhaps from a list set up in some Aegean temple. 

The list starts with the fall of Troy. That catastrophe, by whatever 
coalition of invaders it was immediately produced, is taken as typifying 
the final downfall of the old Aegean system, a system which in Greek 
tradition is represented by the ancient thalassocratia of Minos. But 
what exactly is meant by a thalassocratia, or control of the seas? It 
seems to mean something quite definite, not a mere general naval 
preponderance, because the dates of the various ‘controls’ are marked 
off so precisely. And the wars of the Diadochi, in which first Demetrius 
Poliorcétés, then Ptolemy, then Antigonus Gonatas are masters of the 
Aegean, provide a very suggestive parallel. (See Tarn, Antigonus 
Gonatas, 1913.) The explanation is, I think, to be found in the peculiar 
geography of the Aegean, and in the distinctive character of the great 
Aegean centres. They were (pp. 36 ff.), generally speaking, fortified toll 
stations: the various cities of Crete commanding all the southern trade 
routes ; Troy those of the Hellespont ; Thebes the traffic between its 
‘three seas’; and even Mycenae, which seems so remote, some important 
trade routes between the Aegean and the Corinthian gulf. And the 
Aegean is so formed that both to the north, the south-east, and the south- 
west the necessary routes of trade are well marked and narrow. The 
whole of them together could be controlled by a really strong sea power, 
though it is not likely that an ancient command of the seas was often 
so complete as that. When one reflects on the amount of fighting 
which went on in historical times for the possession of, say, the 
Hellespont or Naxos, and the constant train of explosive maritime 
rivalry, ever ready to burst out in commercial wars, such as that be- 
tween Miletus-Eretria-Athens and Chalkis-Samos-Aegina, the conclusion 
strongly suggests itself that the prize in each case was the control of 
one or more of these five or six great passages or toll stations of the 
Aegean, and that such control constituted ‘thalassocratia’. A power 
became completely ‘thalassocratés’ as soon as it could establish a 
guard of ships and forts at, say, the Hellespont, the channels of the 
Cyclades round Naxos or Delos, the passages on each side of Carpathos, 
and on each side of Ogylos, together with certain roads of more local 
trade, like the Straits of Euboea. 

Now, if we turn to the List of Thalassocrats, we find at the very 
outset two phenomena which we might well have expected. First, for 
a long time after the fall of Troy there seems to have been no 
thalassocracy at all; and secondly, it is a very long time indeed, 
certainly 400 years and perhaps 600, before there is a genuinely Greek 

ΤΥ ὩΣ 


324 APPENDIX C 


thalassocracy. The Fall of Troy was dated by the authors of the list— 
viz. the tradition represented by Eusebius-Diodorus-Eratosthenes—at 
1184 B.c. The list then runs!; 


Lydi et Maeones 92 years [ Cares —?| years 
Pelasgi 85 Lesbii —? 
Thraces 79 Phocaeenses 44 

Rhodii 23 Samii 17 
Phryges 25 Lacedaemonii 2 

Cyprii 52 ΟἹ 21» Naxii fe) 
Phoenices 45 Eretrienses 15 
Aegyptii 60? Aeginetae 10 

Milesii 18 


Now the dates at the bottom of this list can be verified. The 
Aeginetan thalassocracy certainly ended in 480 B.c. We work from 
480 B. c. backwards, and find a considerable though of course a steadily 
decreasing amount of historical confirmation as we go. There are one 
or two confusions, notably a grave one at Nos. ro and 11, the Carians 
and Lesbians. These two powers have, in the first place, no specific 
time of duration attached to them; and, in the second place, there 
seems to be very little room for either. But whatever we do with these 
confused places, it is practically impossible to stretch out the dates 
given in the list so as to fill the whole historical period between the fall 
of Troy and the invasion of Xerxes. On Mr. Myres’ arrangement there 
is a gap at the beginning, directly after the Trojan War, amounting 
to 128 or 138 years. On any plausible system there is about a century 
missing. 

Now what are we to make of this gap? I suspect that it really is a 
gap, and that after the fall of the old Aegean empires there was no 
power strong enough or well enough organized to command much of 
the Aegean beyond its own shores. Mr. Myres thinks that the Carians 
have been transposed in the list. They are put tenth, where there is 
no room for them; they should have been first, where they are wanted. 
There is evidence in Diodorus for this suggested rearrangement, and it 
is quite likely to be right. But I would suggest that if we interpret the 
language properly a Carian thalassocracy at that date is probably the 
same thing as no thalassocracy at all. These race names are apt to be 
loosely handled, as we saw in Lecture II. Diodorus and the Greek 

* I take the figures from Mr. Myres’ list, marking the more uncertain 
figures. The textual criticism of the list is highly complicated; see Mr. 
Fotheringham’s article. He considers on purely textual grounds that 


Eusebius’ text gave Aegyptii 43, Cares 61, and Lesbii perhaps 68. The last 
two figures would then be mistakes on the part of Eusebius or his authority. 


THE THALASSOCRATS 325 


historians frequently use the word Carian to denote the aboriginal or 
pre-Hellenic inhabitants of the Aegean in general. Any rude and weak 
creatures whom you drove out of an island were roughly described as 
Carian. ‘Take the most explicit passage, Diod. v. 84: 


After the capture of Troy the Carians increased and became 
more powerful at sea: getting possession of the Cyclades they 
seized some for themselves and drove out the Cretans who were 
settled there, while they occupied others in common with the 
Cretans who were there before. Afterwards when the Hellenes 
increased, it befell that most of the Cyclades were colonized, and 
the barbarous Carians driven out. 


I suspect that one might put that statement in other words, thus: 


After the fall of the Minoan or Aegean empires, under the 
influence of the northern invasions, the first effect was not that the 
northern invaders began to control the seas. They were not 
advanced enough for that. It was that the subject populations in 
the islands began to raise their heads, and especially formed a 
small piratical power in the Cyclades. The guards of the local 
Minoan forts, being cut off from their base, were faced with two 
alternatives. They either resisted to the uttermost and perished. 
Or they made terms with the natives, and eventually sank to their 
level. When the Greeks came into existence as a people, they 
found the Cyclades inhabited by populations who were a mixture 
of the uncivilized Carian-Lelegian-Hittite natives and the isolated 
remnants of the Minoan settlements. 


The first thalassocracy mentioned on the list is that of the Lydians 
and Maeones. Possibly some federation of the coast people of Asia 
Minor arose, under the protection of Lydia, for resisting the piracy 
of the Carians in the islands. It is nearly a century later that we find 
the first suggestion of a thalassocracy of Northern invaders, and even 
that is ambiguous. The Pelasgians, however, are possibly the definite 
tribe of that name, the tribe which raided Boeotia during the Trojan 
War, and, taking to the sea, made settlements in Lemnos, Attica, and 
Crete. They at any rate are succeeded by a real Northern race, the 
Thracians, who have left traces in the Maeander valley, in Naxos and 
Attica, as well as in Boeotia and Phocis. From what we know of the 
Thracians in historical times it is difficult to suppose that their control 
of the seas amounted to more than vigorous piracy. Next comes the 
first glimpse of something that seems Hellenic: the Rhodians are 
thalassocrats from about 800 B.c. for the short space of twenty-three 
years. But was Rhodes at that time a Hellenic island? The settlement 
of Rhodes is attributed by Greek tradition to a very early period, 
perhaps to the end of the eleventh century. Wandering Dorians, 


326 APPENDIX C 


people from Megara in two relays, people from Crete and from Argos, 
seem to have joined hands there. And it is quite likely that when 
Rhodes began to use its geographical position, holding the south-east 
gate of the Aegean, it deserved actually to be called a Hellenic power. 
In any case, it could not long stand, and no other Hellenic power 
could support or even succeed it. There follow Phrygians, Cyprians, 
Phoenicians, Egyptians, covering some 160 years. ‘The Cyprians were 
scarcely Hellenic at this time, and the rest are plain βάρβαροι, though 
we happen to know that the Egyptian sea-power depended a good deal 
upon ‘Ionian and Carian’ ships. The Greeks, it seems, could supply 
the ships and the fighting material; they could not yet supply the 
permanent basis and organization. But that step was easy to take. 
And when Egypt became distracted by the invasion of Nebuchadnezzar 
in 604 B.C., the centre of gravity changed from the mouth of the Nile to 
the harbour of Miletus, and the Aegean for many centuries to come 
remained a Greek sea. Milesians 18 years; Lesbians 4; Phocaeans 44 ; 
Samians 17; Lacedaemonians 2; Naxians 10; Eretrians 15; Aegi- 
netans ro; and then the Athenian Empire. 


APPENDIX, D 


HUBRIS, DIKE AND HORKOS! 


Tuis central idea of Aidés has various ramifications in the ethics of 
early Greek poetry. Most of the Homeric words of disapproval mean 
something like ‘excess’, or ‘going too far’, and imply that there are 
points where a man should check himself. The wicked are ἀτάσθαλοι, 
‘outrageous’, ὑπερήφανοι, ‘ overweening’, ἄδικοι, ‘away from Diké’, justice 
or law: most of all, wickedness is Ὕβρις. That word is the antithesis 
of σωφροσύνη and of αἰδώς, and like its antitheses it defies translation 
into our forms of thought. It unites so many ideas which we analyse 
and separate: and it has a peculiar emotional thrill in it, which is lost 
instantly if we attempt to make careful scientific definitions. We can 
understand it, I think, in this way. Aidés—or Sdphrosyné, which is 
slightly more intellectual—implies that, from some subtle emotion inside 
you, some ruth or shame or reflection, some feeling perhaps of the 
comparative smallness of your own rights and wrongs in the presence of 

? For a further analysis of these and other ideas of primitive Greek society 
see Mr. F. M. Cornford’s illuminating book, /rom Religion to Philosophy, 


especially the early chapters: also Glotz, Solidarité de la Famille, and 
Etudes sociales et juridiques. 


HUBRIS, DIKE AND HORKOS 327 


the great things of the world, the gods and men’s souls and the portals 
of life and death, from this emotion and from no other cause, amid your 
ordinary animal career of desire or anger or ambition, you do, every 
now and then, at certain places, stop. There are unseen barriers which 
a man who has Aidés in him does not wish to pass. Hubris passes 
them all. Hubris does not see that the poor man or the exile has come 
from Zeus: Hubris is the insolence of irreverence: the brutality of 
strength. In one form it is a sin of the low and weak, irreverence; the 
absence of Aiddés in the presence of something higher. But nearly 
always it is a sin of the strong and proud. It is born of Kovos, or 
satiety—of ‘being too well off’; it spurns the weak and helpless out of 
its path, ‘spurns,’ as Aeschylus says, ‘the great Altar of Diké’ (4g. 383). 
And Hubris is the typical sin condemned by early Greece. Other sins, 
except some connected with definite religious taboos, and some derived 
from words meaning ‘ugly’ or ‘unfitting’, seem nearly all to be forms 
or derivatives of Hubris. 

What relations are there between this group of ideas and the other 
great conception of ‘Justice’, Themis or Diké? Both words have a 
strong flavour of custom or precedent in them, but their meaning is 
different. Themis is the Right Custom, the thing that is always done 
and therefore legitimate, inside the group: Diké is the dispute between 
two persons, or between the group and another group, and the Right 
Decision that is given when such a dispute occurs. A King can utter 
Themistes or Dooms, merely declaring the right way of behaviour. An 
oracle is the seat of Themis; where the most ancient fountains of 
knowledge, the dead ancestors, declare ‘what is done’ under such and 
such circumstances. This can occur without any argument or conflict, 
whereas Diké is the ‘thing done’, or the ‘right custom’, in trying and 
judging a dispute. 

Thus Diké and Themis are themselves one of the bonds which Aidés 
enables you to feel. You feel ‘what a man has a right to expect’. If 
your neighbour takes one of your cattle, you will naturally apply to the 
judges to make the man give it back, with perhaps something extra for 
damages. That is what is always done: what you have a right to 
expect. If the judge, having received bribes from your neighbour, 
refuses to hear you, then you are aggrieved: that is not Diké, not the 
normal course. The judge has no Aidds. The people, and the gods, 
will feel Nemesis. ‘Diké’ is associated with trials, while ‘Themis’ 
seems rather specially to be concerned with the keeping or breaking 
of Oaths. 

False Swearing, though it is not mentioned in Hesiod’s list of the five 


328 APPENDIX D 


deadly offences, is in general one of the most typical and most loudly 
cursed of ancient sins. And its relation to Aidés is very close. 

The word Horkos, which we translate an oath, really means ‘a fence’, 
or ‘something that shuts you in’. The process by which the oath becomes 
important is this. You make to a man some statement or promise, and 
then he requires some πίστις, some ὅρκος---ἃ πίστις to make him feel 
confident, an ὅρκος to fence you in. The simplest form of ‘Horkos’, 
and according to Medea (Eur. Med. v. 21) the greatest, is simply to 
clasp hands. With more formality you can, both of you, call upon the 
gods, or the daimones who happen to be present in the air about you, to 
witness the spoken word. Or you can ensure their presence by calling 
them to a sacrifice. And, instead of being satisfied with the general 
Nemesis which these divine witnesses and judges will feel if the word is 
broken, you and your friend can specify the exact punishment which the 
gods are to inflict upon you if you fail. That is the Horkos, the ‘sanction’ 
which binds the speaker. In general, covenant by oath belongs to a 
form of society which cannot enforce its judgements. It is ultimately 
an appeal to Honour, to Aidés. Of course priests and prophets may 
thunder about the vengeance which the gods will exact for a breach of 
the covenant which they witnessed: but that sort of vengeance has in 
all ages of the world remained a little remote or even problematical. 
The real point of importance is that there is no vengeance by men, and 
no available human witness. The man who has sworn is really face to 
face with nothing but his own sense of Aidés, A/ws a vague fear of gods 
and spirits, who are for the main part only the same Aidés personified 
and wrapt in mythology. The thing that makes the perjurer especially 
base, or ἀναιδής, 15 precisely his security from danger. I knew once a 
perfect case of the simplest Horkos. A certain Egyptian wished an 
Englishman to take a quantity of antiquities to Europe and sell them 
for him. The Englishman accepted the trust, and drew up a full 
catalogue of the articles, with a list of the prices which he might expect 
to get for each of them. The Egyptian shook his head at all this com- 
plication of securities: ‘I would like’, he said, ‘if you will shake my 
hand, and say you will be my brother.’ That handshake was the 
Horkos, the fence or bond. A man who broke through such a Horkos 
would be ἀναιδής, a shameless or ruthless man. It is just what Jason 
did to Medea. 

I have not attempted in the text to consider the origin of any of these 
terms, but Mr. Cornford, in his chapter on A/oira, has essayed in a very 
striking manner to trace their ultimate derivation from the spatial 
divisions of a primitive tribe. Cf. Mauss et Durkheim, ‘ Formes primi- 


HUBRIS, DIKE AND HORKOS 329 


tives de classification’, Année Soc. 1901-2. The Moirai, or Portions, are 
the traditional moieties or structural divisions of the tribe: there is a 
Dasmos or Distribution of these Moirai (cf. the regular Dasmos of the 
Moirai of the gods, Zeus having heaven, Poseidon the sea, Hades the 
underworld, &c.); the Horkos is the ‘fence’ or barrier between these 
Moirai ; specially important is the Tribal Pasture; Νόμος, ‘Custom ’, 
‘Law’, is the legitimate power wielded (cf. νέμειν κράτη) within a ‘range’ 
or ‘province’ (νομός) which is ultimately a pasture or feeding-ground 
(νομός and νομή). Nemesis (on Mr. Cook’s lines, from νέμος) is con- 
nected with the pasture-ground and its rules which must not be 
transgressed, and so on. It is interesting to note that in Eur. Hipp. 78 
Aidés is connected with abstinence from trespassing on a taboo meadow. 

Other primitive moral terms are derived from the order of the Moon 
and the Seasons. 


AP PENDIX=E 


THE PSEUDO-CALLISTHENES 


Tuer MSS. of the Greek version of the Alexander Romance, attributed 
to Callisthenes, the well-known savant who accompanied Alexander’s 
expeditions, fall into three main classes, represented by— 

A (Paris, 1711), of the eleventh century. This version practically 
agrees with the Latin translation of Julius Valerius, made 
before A.D. 340, and the Armenian translation made in the 
fifth century. 

B (Paris, 1685; bearing date A.M. 6977 = A.D. 1469), abbreviated. 
The good Leyden MS., L, is of this class. 

C (Paris, 113 Suppl., bearing date a. Ὁ. 1567), greatly expanded. 

As a mark of difference we may take the point that A inserts the 
Greek campaign between 1. 41 and 11. 7, awkwardly making the con- 
nexion by inserting κἀκεῖθεν ὥρμησεν εἰς τὰ μέρη TOV βαρβάρων διὰ τῆς 
Κιλικίας. 

B and C put the Greek campaign at i. 27, but give different accounts 
of it; they then insert an abbreviated repetition of the same events at 
i. 41. The Greek campaign is evidently in both cases an interpolation 
from another source, and breaks the connexion. 

The differences between these various classes of MSS. cannot be 
illustrated except in large extracts. They are tabulated in K. Miller’s 
introduction, pp. x ff., in his large edition of Arrian and Callisthenes. 
Still less can the differences between the various translations. But a 


330 APPENDIX E 


short passage taken from two MSS. of the same class, and thus closely 
resembling one another, may be instructive. 

Subjoined is a passage (i. 18) as it appears in Paris C and Baroce. 17, 
showing the freedom with which the scribe treats his original. The 
scribe of Barocc. 17, for instance, prefers to put the chariot race at 
Rome by the temple of Cafitolian Zeus, instead of Pisa and Olympian 
Zeus. And he uses his own fancy in narrating the conversation between 
Alexander and his father. The passage is fairly typical. 


Lo) = lal ε ΨΥ a lal A 
Mig οὖν τῶν ἡμερῶν ᾿Αλέξανδροσ μετὰ τῶν συνηλικιωτῶν αὐτοῦ συνών, λόγουσ ἐν 


Ἐ “- > rn e a ‘ an e “- 9 A A X /, 5» 
ν μιᾳ ουν Των Ὥμερων μετα των ἡλικιωτῶν αὐτου συνὼν, ογουσ εκ 


, , ͵ a ε 
λόγοισ προτείναντεσ, εἰσφέρεται λόγοσ, Ho ὅτε εἰσ Iicav ἁρματηλατοῦσιν οἱ 


’, , “ ε 
λόγων προτεινόντων, εἰσφέρεται λόγοσ, Ho ὅτι ἐν Ῥώμῃ ἁρματηλατοῦσιν οἱ 


δοκιμώτεροι τῶν βασιλέων παῖδεσ, καὶ τῷ νικήσαντι ἄθλα διδοῦσιν ἀπὸ τοῦ Ὀλυμ- 
εὐδοκιμώτεροι τῶν βασιλέων παῖδεσ καὶ τῷ νικήσαντι ἄθλα δίδοται παρὰ τοῦ Καπε- 


, 7: τος τῶι SEAR , SA , a a 2 , 
πίου Avo" ὃσ ὃ αν ἡττηθείσ, παρα τῶν νικησαντων θανατοῦται. Ταῦτα ἀκούσασ 


’ὔ »Ἁ ε Ὁ τ Ν ‘\ aA , A aA 3 , 
τωλίου Διόσ. Ὁ δὲ ἡττηθεὶσ παρὰ τῶν νικησάντων θανατοῦται. ταῦτα ἀκούσασ 


3 “ ~ 
Αλέξανδροσ ἔρχεται πρὸσ Φίλιππον δρομαῖοσ, καὶ εὑρίσκει αὐτὸν εὐκαιροῦντα 


Αλέξανδροσ ἔρχεται πρὸσ τὸν πρα αὐτοῦ δρομαῖοσ, καὶ 
Ν 
καὶ καταφιλήσασ αὐτὸν εἶπε Πάτερ, δέομαί σου, ἐπί- 
λέγει: Δέομαί σου, ὦ δέσποτα, τῶ ἐν ἐμοὶ καταθύμιον πλή- 


A lal > 
τρεψόν μοι εἰσ Wicav πλεῦσαι ἐπὶ τὸν ἀγῶνα τῶν ᾿Ολυμπίων, ἐπειδὴ ἀγωνίσασθαι 


1 


Ν Ν ε / , 5 ’ λ / > e ’ ε A 
ρωσον, καὶ τὸ ἁρμόζων παρασχόμενοσ ' ἀπόστειλόν μοι ἐν ἹΡώμ ἁρματηλατῆσαι. 


ε - 
βούλομαι. Ὁ δὲ Φίλιπποσ εἶπε πρὸσ αὐτόν" Kai ποῖον ἄσκημα ἀσκήσασ τούτουσἥ 


Ὁ δὲ Φίλιπποσ λέγει: ὦ βία ἀπὸ σοῦ, παῖ" ὅ οὔπω γάρ σοι ὄγδοον ἔτοσ 


ἐπιθυμεῖσ ; οὐ συγχωρῶ σοι τοῦτο πρᾶξαι. 
διῆλθε καὶ ἁρματηλατῆσαι βούλει; οὐ συγχωρῶ σοι τοῦτο πρᾶξαι. 


The upper line throughout is Paris C, the lower the Bodleian cod. 
Baroce. 17. See much longer extracts in Meusel, Ps.-Cadllisthenes, 
pp. 794 ff. 

It is worth remarking that the commonest errors in the Callisthenes 
MSS. are those which come from mere misspelling. If the pronunciation 
came right the spelling mattered little. The book was essentially the 
prompt-book of an oral story-teller. 


1 i.e. give me my share of the inheritance. 
2 Should be τούτου. 5 ‘Via! Far be it from thee!’ 


THE PSEUDO-CALLISTHENES 331 


I have not met with Néldeke, Bettrage zur Geschichte des Alexander- 
romans (1890). The Syriac and Ethiopic versions have been edited 
with great learning by Budge (1889 and 1896 respectively). He points 
out that much of the material is of immemorial antiquity. For instance, 
Etanna, a Babylonian hero, rode on an eagle up to the gods. He 
reached Anu Ea and Bel, rested, and went on towards Ishtar, but the 
eagle grew faint and fell. This story was then attached to the Assyrian- 
Accadian Gilgamesh, to Bellerophon, and at last to Alexander. (Ps.- 
Kall. ii. 41.) 


APPENDIX. EF 


STAGES OF OLD FRENCH POEMS: ROLAND 
AND! SZ, ALEXIS 


NoTE ON Z4 CHANSON DE ROLAND. 


TAKEN chiefly from Gaston Paris’s Introduction to his little book of 
L£xtraits (8th edition, Hachette, 1905). The history of this ‘ traditional 
book’ can be made out in more detail and with more definite evidence 
than that of any ancient Epic, though of course it must not be supposed 
that M. Paris’s results are absolutely final. We find the following stages : 

I. Zhe historical event. In Α. Ὁ. 778, Charlemagne, the young King 
of the Franks, was returning from an expedition in the North of Spain, 
where he had been received in various cities, but shut out from Saragossa. 
When his main army had passed the Pyrenees, the rear-guard with the 
baggage was surprised ὧν the Basgues in the valley of Roncesvaux and 
cut to pieces. Among the slain were the Seneschal Eggthard, the Count 
of the Palace, Anselm, and Hrodland, Count of the March of Britanny. 
We know that this disaster became immediately famous, because of the 
language of an historian who wrote only sixty years after. He mentions 
the engagement, and adds: ‘extremi quidam in eodem monte regii 
caesi sunt agminis : quorum, quia vulgata sunt, nomina dicere supersedi.’ 
(Life of Louis I, in Pertz, SS. ii. 608.) The epitaph of the Seneschal 
Eggihard has been discovered, and shows that the battle took place on 
August 15. Apart from the epitaph, Eggihard and Anselm have dis- 
appeared from fame. Roland was a Breton, and we often find that the 
Breton songs have more vitality than others. 

Such is the Frankish account, confirmed in most respects by that of 
the Arab Ibn-al-Athir (thirteenth century, but drawing on ancient 
sources). He, however, attributes the attack to the Moslems of Sara- 


33? APPENDIX F 


gossa, not to the Basques. It would seem most probable that the 
Moslems organized the attack, and instigated the Basques. (G. Paris, 
Légendes du Moyen Age, pp. 3, 4.) 

11. The earliest poetical account, a source which we may denote as RCT. 
That is, a state of the poem represented by the common elements in 
three extant sources. These are (1) the Norman-French poem, /o/and 
(R), of the eleventh century ; (2) the prose chronicle which bears the 
name of Archbishop Turpin (T), and narrates these events in chapters 
xxI-xxix (early twelfth century) ; (3) a Latin poem, Carmen de prodttione 
Guenonis (C), which is of the same epoch, but represents an earlier 
state of the poem than our extant MSS. (i.e. than any extant form of R). 

RCT, then, represents the poem as it was before these various versions 
had made their different modifications of it. According to RCT: 

Charlemagne, Emperor of the Romans, has conquered all Spain 
except Saragossa, which is held by the brothers Marsile and Baligant, 
under the suzerainty of the ‘Admiral of Babylon’. (Babylon seems to 
mean Bagdad: if so, this is a memory of the very ancient suzerainty of 
the Eastern Caliphs over Spain.) He sends Gane/on to demand their 
submission. Ganelon is bribed, and promises to betray the best French 
warriors to the Saracens. He returns to Charles, announces the sub- 
mission of the brothers, and induces Charles to return to France, leaving 
behind him, as rear-guard, the best of his barons, including As nephew 
Roland, Count of Le Mans and Blaie, Oliver, Count of Geneva, and 
20,000 Christians. These are attacked at Roncesvaux by 50,000 
Saracens, led by Ganelon. The first army corps of 20,000 Saracens is 
destroyed by the French. Then a fresh body of 30,000 Saracens 
destroys the French, except Roland and a hundred men. Roland 
blows his horn and rallies the hundred, who pursue and rout the 
Saracens. Roland kills Marsile, and then proceeds to die of his 
wounds. He bids farewell to his peerless sword, Durendal, and tries in 
vain to break it. It cuts through the marble on which he strikes it. 
Then, to warn the main army, he blows his horn again, so loud that it 
bursts the veins of his neck. Charles hears the horn and would return, 
but Ganelon persuades him that Roland is only hunting. Presently 
there arrives Baldwin, Roland’s brother, with news of the disaster. The 
army returns, to find Roland dead ; also Oliver, and others. ‘There is 
a great lament. Charles pursues the Saracens. Night is approaching, 
but a miracle retards the sun, so that he overtakes them on the bank 
of the Ebro, and kills all that are left. Ganelon is accused of treason. 
There ts an ordeal; Pinabel fights for Ganelon, Tierri for Charles. 
Tierri kills Pinabel, and Ganelon is torn in pieces. Roland is buried 


STAGES OF OLD FRENCH POEMS 333 


in St. Romain de Blaie, while his horn is left at St. Severin in Bordeaux. 
Oliver is buried at Belin. Charles returns to Aix and, after a time, dies, 

III. A source RC, i.e. the story common to Roland and the Carmen, 
but not to Turpin. Various changes have been introduced. Aalgant 
has disappeared ; Marsile reigns alone at Saragossa. Ganelon is provided 
with a motive of spite against Roland: it was Roland who recommended 
the Emperor to send Ganelon on the dangerous mission to Marsile. 
The battle is even further embroidered, and the description of the 
country made marvellous. The Zzwelve Peers of Charlemagne are 
introduced, Roland being their chief. ‘They slay twelve similar Peers 
of Marsile. After the second battle with the Pagans a ‘third Pagan 
army comes up. The French are reduced to sixty. There is no 
Baldwin. It is the horn that brings Charlemagne back. Meantime 
Oliver is slain, and Roland and Turpin are the sole survivors of the 
French army. The Saracens flee. Roland collects the bodies of the 
twelve peers, and brings them to the dying Archbishop to receive the 
last blessing. Roland faints from his wounds, ‘Turpin, in an effort to 
fetch water, dies. Roland recovers and folds Turpin’s hands in a cross 
upon his breast, and pronounces a vegre¢ over him. Then he faints 
again. A Saracen returns and tries to take Roland’s sword, Durendal, 
at which Roland recovers consciousness and breaks the Saracen’s head 
with his οὐαί or horn. He tries in vain to break Durendal; says a 
long farewell to all that he loves, dies, and is transported to heaven by 
angels. There are some slight variations in the final scenes also. 
Ganelon, for instance, is écarze/é on the spot, 

IV. Zhe extant Chanson de Roland, or R, composed shortly after 
1066. In this version Marsile is made to take the initiative in offering 
his submission to Charlemagne, and sending hostages. It is in answer 
to this embassy that Charles sends Ganelon to Saragossa, Roland 
offers to go as messenger himself before suggesting Ganelon, who is in 
this version his para¢re—his uncle by marriage—and has a grudge 
against him in consequence. Ganelon is corrupted by the Saracens on 
the way to Saragossa. Nevertheless, on arrival he delivers Charles’ 
defiance just as in the old versions, though the defiance has now lost all 
raison @étre. At the beginning of the battle Oliver sees from a hill the 
vast hordes of the Saracens, and urges Roland to sound the horn. 
Roland from pride refuses; a fine scene, which has a pendent later, 
when Roland wishes to sound the horn and Oliver dissuades him. 
Oliver is more prominent altogether than in the older versions, and 
Roland is betrothed to his sister, Aude. When Marsile is taken 
prisoner and dies, his queen Bramimonde, who, like other Saracen 


334 APPENDIX F 


princesses, admires the Christians, is taken back to France and happily 
baptized. After the burial of Roland, Oliver, and Turpin at Blaie, 
Charles returns to Aix, and there holds a solemn trial of Ganelon. 
This part is worked up. Ganelon intimidates and bribes the judges. 
They acquit him. At last one of them, Tierri—who is now ‘ Tierri of 
Anjou’—takes the office of accuser upon himself, fights Pinabel, and 
hands Ganelon over to his punishment. Charles is about to rest after 
his labours when the angel Gabriel appears in a dream, and orders him 
forth to another expedition to the ‘land of Bire’, to ‘succour the king 
Vivien in Imphe’. So comes the famous ending : 

‘Deus!’ dist li Reis, ‘si penuse est ma vie!’ 

Pleurut des oilz, sa barbe blanche tiret. ... 

Ci fait la Geste que Turoldus declinet. 

V. A large interpolation in R. A little later than R, another poet 
had made a song in which the revenge after Roncesvaux was more 
crushing. Marsile is the vassal of Baligant—the brother and the 
Admiral of Babylon of the early sources combined into one person. 
Summoned to the aid of Marsile, Baligant takes seven years to arrive, 
and appears just in time to rally the Pagan forces after Roncesvaux. 
He challenges Charles to a supreme battle between all the forces of 
Christianity on the one hand and Paganism on the other. This gives 
rise to a ‘Catalogue’ of the thirty columns of the armies of Baligant, 
which forms an interesting parallel to the Homeric Catalogues (2o/and, 
3217-65). The list can be divided into Historical and Imaginary 
peoples; ‘but the Historical peoples are those against whom the 
Christian powers were fighting, not at the time of the Crusades, but 
during the tenth and eleventh centuries’ (Gaston Paris in Romania, 11, 
pp. 330ff.; or L. Gauthier’s note to “Roland, ad loc.). That is, the 
interpolator has not described the Pagans of his own day, but has 
drawn from an ancient list of Pagans, which happens to be even earlier 
than the poem to which he was adding. The Christians of course win, 
and Charles, sustained by an angel, slays Baligant. 

The above versions, IV and V, are best represented in the Oxford 
MS. which affords several curious parallels to the history of the Homeric 
text. ‘‘The Oxford MS. is the work of an Anglo-Norman scribe, and 
the text which this scribe gives us is a very pure specimen of the French 
spoken and written in England a hundred years after the Conquest, 
about the year 1170. But it was long before the year 1170, half a 
century earlier at the least, that the ‘Song of Roland’ was composed by 
the poet, and nothing leads us to think that the poet ever lived, as the 
scribe did, in England. The Oxford text shows itself at first glance as 


STAGES OF OLD FRENCH POEMS 335 


a late transliteration into Anglo-French of a work first written in a 
different idiom. If, further, we consider how in course of a long trans- 
mission which no doubt had its vicissitudes, many scribes and many 
revisers, one after the other, may have modified the original readings in 
the free manner of that age, we are led to suppose that the copy under 
our eyes is separated from the original MS. of the poet by a gulf more 
or less considerable and possibly very great indeed. How are we to 
measure this gulf? Who was the poet, a Norman or a Frenchman 
of France? At what date did he compose his chanson? About the 
year 1110, as ‘many critics including the present writer maintain, or as 
others believe twenty or thirty years earlier, well before the Crusade, 
about 1080? In what language did he write it? In such and such 
a dialect of Normandy, or such and such a dialect of the Capesian 
Kingdom? Or ina literary language, more or less tinged by dialectical 
peculiarities? The answers to these questions vary.” (Chanson de 
Roland publiée et traduite par Joseph Bédier: Introduction, p. 3. no 
date ; 1920?) 

VI. Zhe Rimed Version and later forms. The Chanson is also extant 
ina Venetian MS. of the fourteenth century, and various translations 
into Norwegian prose (twelfth century), German verse, Netherlandish 
verse, &c. But the most important point in the succeeding history of 
the poem is the Rimed Version of the later part of the twelfth century. 
The poetical taste of the period had moved from assonance to rime, 
and the old poems written in assonance were changed throughout. 
This is the opening of a whole new history, the various rimed remanie- 
ments reaching down to the sixteenth century. 

(In assonance the last accented vowel—and the succeeding vowels, if 
any—in each line must be the same; in rime the last accented vowel 
and all succeeding vowels and consonants: thus in assonance we can 
end successive lines with Turpzvs, laréz, dit, ct, murir (Roland, xcv), 
or sages, armes, haltes, chevalchent.) 

A further change in form was the adoption of the Alexandrine, or 
twelve-syllable line divided in the middle, instead of the old ten-syllable. 
The Alexandrine derives its name from the first French version of the 
Pseudo-Callisthenes, a metrical romance written in 1184 by Lambert li 
Tors with the assistance of Alexander of Paris. Examples of the 
changes in text produced by the introduction of rime and Alexandrine 
are given below, from the δὰ Alexis. 


51. ALEXIS. 
Vie de St. Alexis, poéme du XI siécle, et renouvellements des XII¢ 
XIIIe et X1Ve siécles. Gaston Paris et Léopold Pannier, 1887. 


336 APPENDIX F 


This book contains four successive versions of the same poem, 
showing its growth and its adaptation to varying periods of taste. 


I. Eleventh century: assonance: probably chanted in church. 


Bons fut li siecles als tens ancienor, 
Quer feit 1 ert e justise et amor, 

Si ert credance, dont or n’i at nul prot: 
Tot est mudez, perdude at sa color ; 

Ja mais n’iert tels com fut as anceisors. 


Al tens Noe et al tens Abraham, 
Et al David, que Deus par amat tant, 
Bons fut li siecles, &c. 


This may be translated : 


Good was the world in the time of old, 

Surely faith there was and justice and love, 

So was there belief, whereof now there is no profit (?), 
All is dumb, it has lost its colour, 

Never shall it be such as it was to those of old. 


In the time of Noah and in the time of Abraham, 
And of David whom God the Father loved so much, 
Good was the world. 


II. Middle of twelfth century: work of a popular joxgleur. Still in 
assonance, but greatly interpolated. 


[Signour et dames, entendés un sermon 
D’un saintisme home qui Allessis ot non, 
Et d’une feme que il prist a oissor,’ 

Que il guerpi? pour Diu son Creatour, 
Caste pucele et gloriouse flour, 

Qui ains a li nen ot convercion ; 

Pour Diu le fist, s’en a bon guerredon: 
Saulve en est l’ame en ciel nostre signour, 
Li cors en gist a Rome a grant honour. | 
Bons fut li siecles au tans ancienour 
Quar fois i ert et justise et amor, &c. (as in I). 


The largest interpolation comes, characteristically, at the romantic 
moment where Alexis has to relinquish and convert his betrothed—a 
persona muta in the old text ; here 30 verses are expanded into 245. 


III. Rimed version. Twelfth century. Based on the old text, 
but assonances changed to rimes. This sometimes causes great dis- 
turbance. The opening is very close to its original. 


? oissor = wife. 2. guerpi = relinquished. 


STAGES OF OLD FRENCH POEMS 537 


Cha en arriére, au tens anchienors, 

Fois fut en tiere et justiche et amors 

Et verités et creanche et douchors: 

Mais ore est frailes et plains de grans dolors. 
Jamais miert teus con fut as anchissors. 

Ne portent foit li marit lor oissors, 

Ne li vassal fianche lor signors. . . 


Au tens Noé et au tens Moysant, 
Au tens David cui Dius par ama tant, 
Bons fut li siecles, &c. 


(Observe Aoysant instead of Abraham, for the sake of the rime.) 


IV. Alexandrine version, in monorimed quatrains. Fourteenth 
century. This version is based on III, and opens at a passage which is 
about |. 14 of I, 1. 45 of II, and 1. 20 of III. I say ‘about’, since the 
actual line is not in I and II. It is introduced in III in the process of 
running a /aisse of assonances in -a and -e into one long /azsse of rimes 
in -αγιέ, joining on to AZoysant above. 

The process of turning the ten-syllable lines into Alexandrines is, of 
course, child’s-play. 

En Vhonor Diu le glorios poissant 
Ki nos crea trestos a son semblant, &c. 
merely becomes— 
Ens en lonneur de Dieu le pére tout puissant, 
Qui nous fourma et fist trestous a son semblant, &c. 

The peculiar critical value of the S¢. A/exis is that we have it in four 

distinct stages corresponding to four styles of French epic taste. 


APPENDIX G 


EXPURGATION IN THE HYMN TO DEMETER 


Tuis ‘ Homeric’ expurgation extended to the Homeric Hymns also, 
as is illustrated by the Orphic papyrus of the second century B.C. 
recently published by Buecheler in Berdiner Kilassikertexte, v. 1. (See 
also an article upon it by T. W. Allen, in C. #., xxi. 4.) The papyrus 
quotes, as ἐκ τῶν Ὀρφέως ἐπῶν, several passages from the Homeric 
Hymn to Demeter, in a slightly different shape. Notably the following 
incident. 

Demeter, disguised and acting as Nurse in the house of Keleos, 
is secretly making the child Demophoon immortal by soaking him in 
fire. The mother, Metaneira, discovers her putting him in the fire, and 

2760 Z 


338 APPENDIX G 


shrieks with horror. Demeter, ἐμ che Homeric Hymn, takes the child 
out of the fire, puts him on the ground (254f.) and then turns in anger 
on the Mother: ‘Blind and witless are men, knowing not the portion of 
good when it cometh, nor yet of evil. And thou too hast got thee a 
huge hurt by thy follies! So hear me the Horkos of the Gods, the 
unrelenting water of Styx, I would have made thy son deathless and 
ageless for all days, and made undying honour to follow him ; but now, 
I swear, he shall not escape Death and the Slayers !’ 

In the ‘Orphic’ or non-Homeric version there is nothing about 
Demeter taking the child out of the fire. On the contrary, when she 
gets to the words ‘he shall not escape Death and the Slayers’, it 
proceeds: ‘So saying, ... (Ὁ) ing the child she burned it and slew 
it, and proclaimed herself.’ (καὶ τὸ παιδίον emt. kK... σα (Ὁ) καίει Kat 
ἀποκτείνει καὶ ὀρθῶς αὑτὴν διαγορεύει.) And exactly the same story is 
given by Apollodorus 1. 4. 5 τὸ μὲν βρέφος ὑπὸ τοῦ πυρὸς ἀναλώθη, ἡ θεὰ 
δ᾽ ἑαυτὴν ἐξέφηνε. 

There can be little hesitation as to which of these versions is the 
older and more original. The whole myth is based on a ritual not 
_ indeed of child-sacrifice, as I conjectured in the first edition of this 
book, but of child-ordeal, as Mr. W. R. Halliday has shown in C. Δ. 
xxv. p. 8. The fire-washing was one of those ‘rites de passage’ by 
which the young member of a primitive tribe was initiated or specially 
fortified against dangers and weaknesses. The typical instance is the 
flogging of the Spartan cranes at the altar of Artemis Orthia. (All these 
rites were supposed by the Greeks themselves to be remnants of Human 
Sacrifice.) 

The ἱερὸς λόγος connected with the rite naturally told how the goddess 
herself had instituted it, how the rite, when properly performed and 
unwatched by outsiders, was infinitely beneficial, but, if interrupted, 
death-bringing. The interrupted goddess threw the child into the fire, 
as any primitive deity naturally would. When this idea became 
repulsive to pious men, the tale was softened. The goddess only 
puts the child down on the hearth, a very soft-hearted and civilized 
proceeding. The child so saved is, one may conjecture, the origin of 
ὁ ἀφ᾽ ἑστίας παῖς so often mentioned in connexion with the Mysteries, ὃς 
ἀντὶ πάντων TOV μυουμένων ἀπομειλίσσεται τὸ θεῖον. Porph. de Ads? 4. 5. 
(See Farnell, Cwés, ili. p. 352, note 209.) The reverse process would 
contradict all analogy. 

This throws light on another point. We have long observed that 
those parts of the Demeter cult which struck unsympathetic observers 
as obscene have no place in the Homeric Hymn, while they are quoted 


EXPURGATION IN THE HYMN TO DEMETER 339 


from ‘Orpheus’ by Clement and Arnobius (Abel, Ovffica, fr. 215). It 
was just conceivable that they might have come in as a late degradation 
of a rite which in ‘Homeric times’ was pure. But now it is pretty 
evident that they must go along with the primitive barbarity of the child- 
burning story. They belong to the things expurgated from Homer. (See 
Mr. Allen (1. c.), who still inclines to the other view. For the probable 
explanation of Baubo, see Diels, Arcana Cerealia, in Miscellanea dt 
Archeologia dedicata al Prof. Salinas. Palermo, 1907.) 

The expurgations of some ancient critics, especially Zenodotus, for 
which we generally laugh at them, are merely continuations of the 
Homeric spirit. E.g. Zenodotus on II 93-6, and apparently the whole 
Koiné together with Aristarchus on the Phoenix story, I 458-61, 
Sosiphanes on 453, &c. They objected to what was ἀπρεπές, which was 
quite in the spirit of Homer, supposing the standard of ‘unseemliness’ 
to be the same. 


APPEN DEX. Ἢ 


THE: EPIC: CYCLE 


Tuis note will do little more than restate in a much shortened form 
Wilamowitz’s criticism on the views of the Cycle current in 1884. I 
shall not attempt any positive account of the Cycle. Such a work takes 
one far afield and cannot be essayed with any prospect of success except 
on the basis of a thorough study of the Mythographi and their methods : 
see Schwartz and Bethe, as referred to below. I shall merely deal with 
certain false ideas of the Cycle which affect the preliminaries of the 
Homeric Question. See also the full and careful account by Monro 
in his edition of the Odyssey (App. pp. 340-84), against which some of 
my criticism here is directed. 

My own view is, roughly speaking, that to call the authors of the 
Cypria or the Zhebats ‘cyclic poets’ is very like calling Shakespeare 
and Milton ‘birthday-book poets’. The Greek poets were no more 
responsible for the Cycle than the English are for the birthday-books, 
Nay, more: the birthday-books do at least profess to quote the actual 
words of Shakespeare ; but the Cycle only professed to tell the general 
mass of epic history, using the old poems as authorities. It seldom 
gave a quotation and seems freely to have filled in gaps and omitted 
redundancies, though it sometimes gave variant versions according to 
different poets. 

But to come to the evidence. Our supposed knowledge of the ‘ Epic 

Z2 


340 APPENDIX H 


Cycle’ is based chiefly on certain extracts from the Chrestomathetia 
Grammatiké or ‘Compendium of Useful Knowledge in Literature’ made 
by Proclus—presumably the Neoplatonic philosopher in the fifth century 
after Christ. The extracts come to us in two forms: (1) A very brief 
epitome in Photius’s Bibliotheca (c. 850 A.D.); (2) some fuller but 
fragmentary epitomae of that part of Proclus which dealt with the Zvojan 
Cycle, preserved in the Scholia to the Z/ad. (Dindorf, Vol. I, pp. xxxi—xli : 
also in Kinkel’s Zpicorum Fragmenta, init.) The view I wish to correct 
accepts Proclus’s account—or the account given by the Scholiast of 
Proclus’s account—practically without criticism. 

Photius (p. 319) tells us that Proclus gave a catalogue of the chief 
epic poets and their biographies: ‘he embraces also an account of the 
so-called Epic Cycle, which begins with the legendary Marriage of 
Heaven and Earth... and goes on through the various myths related 
by the Greeks about the Gods and some few stories that are true in 
history ; the Epic Cycle, made complete out of various poets, ends with the 
landing of Odysseus in Ithaca, where he is killed by his son Telegonus 
who does not know him. He says that the poems of the Epic Cycle 
are preserved and studied generally not for their merit but for the 
sequence of events (τὴν ἀκολουθίαν τῶν πραγμάτων). 

Such ‘cycles’ were made by many Grammatici in Alexandrian times, 
from the κύκλος ἱστορικός of ‘Dionysius the Cyclographer’ onwards. 
Even a short study of the mythographical literature shows us how these 
handbooks were copied word by word one from another with such 
additions or omissions as suited the aims of the particular writer. For 
instance, the last sentence cited from Photius above, ‘the poems of the 
cycle are preserved and studied, &c.’, has probably been copied verbally 
together with the rest of its context from handbook to handbook through 
many centuries. (I agree with most authorities in thinking it almost out 
of the question to suppose that the old poems themselves were extant 
in Proclus’s time.) The first source cannot be traced; but Bethe has 
shown that many of Proclus’s sentences show marked verbal similarity 
with sentences in the fragments of Apollodorus’s 4ié/iotheca, the author 
of which pretty certainly used a ‘cycle’. (Bethe in Hermes xxvi.) 

The Epic Cycle is that part of the general Cyclus Historicus which 
comprises epic, or legendary, history ; parts of it again are referred to 
as the ‘Trojan Cycle’, the ‘Theban Cycle’. The Trojan Cycle in 
Proclus is given as follows : 

1. The Cyg7za, from the Judgement of Paris to the capture of Chryseis 
and Briseis, the death of Palamedes, and the ‘counsel’ of Zeus ; author, 
Stasinus of Cyprus (amid other competitors). 


THE EPIC CYCLE 341 


2. The /éad by Homer. 

3. The Aethiopis by Arctinus of Miletus, from the end of the Z/ad 
to the death of Achilles. 5 books. The heroine is the Amazon, 
Penthesilea. 

4. The Little Iiad by Lesches of Mytilene, from the contest for the 
Arms of Achilles to the taking of Troy. 4 books. 

5. The Sack of lion by Arctinus. 2 books. 

6. The Vostot, or Homecomings of the Greek chieftains, by Agias of 
Trozén. 5 books. 

7. The Odyssey by Homer. 

8. Zelegonia by Eugammon of Cyrene. 2 books. 

Now some scholars, accepting Proclus as he stands, have deduced 
from him several conclusions which are to my mind unjustifiable. 

1. Some have actually argued that the poets themselves (in the seventh 
century B. Cc. !) clubbed together to compose a Cycle. ‘This seems to me 
so contrary to all history and to the words of Proclus as scarcely to need 
detailed refutation. It is, however, conclusively refuted by Monro, 
pp. 342-4. Abandoning this extreme suggestion, Monro and others 
argue from the contents of the poems in Proclus’s account of the Cycle 
that the poems themselves presuppose the existence of the J/vad and 
Odyssey and were, in a sense, written to fill up their omissions. 

2. They have accepted as canonical the list of six poems, each com- 
plete with its author, as given by Proclus. 

3. They have accepted for these authors a series of dates based upon 
the Chronicon of Eusebius. 

In criticism of this method of treating the question Wilamowitz points 
out, first, that Proclus is a writer belonging quite to the decline of 
learning, and that we have not even the statements of Proclus entire, 
but only in extracts and epitomae; and secondly, that there are earlier 
and better authorities available, and they use quite different language. 

1. We may take first the Tabula Iliaca (No. 1 in Jahn-Michaelis, 
Bilderchroniken, 1873), a large relief illustrating scenes in the history 
of the Trojan War. It is drawn up on the scheme of a grammarian 
called Theodorus, and belongs to the first century B.c. While 
partly agreeing with Proclus, it makes up the post-homeric part of its 
Trojan Cycle from ‘the Ae¢Aiopis according to Arctinus, the so-called 
Little Iliad according to Lesches of Pyrrha, and the Sack of Ilion 
according to Stesichorus’. ‘That is, the ‘Epic Cycle’ was not a fixed 
whole. Theodorus could follow the epico-lyric poet Stesichorus in 
preference to Proclus’s Arctinus. Also, observe Theodorus’s language : 
he uses the Aethiopis ‘according to’ Arctinus, the Sack ‘according to’ 


342 APPENDIX H 


Stesichorus. That is, the Aethiopis or the Sack is to him a fixed mass 
of legend, a traditional subject of poetry, which he can give according 
to any one of its successive composers. He does not think of the 
Aethiopis as a new poem inyented by Arctinus ; nor does he think of 
his own work as a mere exact reproduction of the poems which he cites 
as authorities. (See e.g. his illustration of “αὖ Y.) He writes 
Θεοδώρειον μάθε τάξιν Ὁμήρου, "Opa δαεὶς πάσης μέτρον ἔχης σοφίας. 
‘Learn Theodorus’s arrangement of Homer’—that is, an epitomization 
of the whole of legendary history—‘ that, knowing it, you may have the 
measure of all wisdom’ (see above, p. 298 f.). 

Further, the Tabulae know of a much greater number of these old 
poems which could be used to form a ‘cycle’ than does Proclus or 
Photius. In the Theban Cycle of the Tabuia Borgiaca (VI. K.), where 
the text is mutilated, we cannot even identify all the poems mentioned. 
This is very different from the six ‘cyclic’ poems with one author each, 
which we get in the epitome of Proclus. We must always remember 
that, if we had the whole text of Proclus, it might be much less positive. 
The abbreviator may have simply, in each case, left out all names 
but one. 

2. About the year 225 a. Ὁ. we find Athenaeus, a really learned man 
and dependent on good authorities, recognizing all these poems, but not 
professing to know their authors or dates. 

Ὁ τὴν Τιτανομαχίαν ποήσας, εἴτ᾽ Εὔμηλός ἐστιν ὁ Κορίνθιος ἢ ᾿Αρκτῖνος 
ἢ δὁστισδήποτε χαίρει ὀνομαζόμενος (277). 

Ὁ τὰ Κύπρια ἔπη πεποηκώς, Ἡγησίας ἢ Στασῖνος ἢ Κύπριος (682). 

Ὁ τὸν Αἰγίμιον ποήσας, εἴθ᾽ Ἣ σίοδός ἐστιν ἢ ἹΚέρκωψ 6 Μιλήσιος (503). 

‘O τὴν ᾿Αλκμαιωνίδα (460), ὁ τὴν κυκλικὴν Θηβαΐδα (465), 6 τὴν τῶν 
᾿Ατρειδῶν κάθοδον (281, 399). Once ὃ τὴν Ἰλίου Iepow .. . ᾿Αγίας, a 
definite name, but one that happens to contradict the Proclus-epitome. 

3. Still more important is Pausanias, writing in the second century 
A.D. and using largely the historians and mythographers of the first 
century Β. 6., contemporaries of Theodorus. He refers several times to 
the lost epics, but especially has a great burst of quotations in his 
account of Polygnotus’s paintings in the Lesché at Delphi (x. 25 ff.), 
where he seems to be using some special authority who possessed great 
knowledge of these poems. (Whether Pausanias himself had seen the 
epics themselves, or seen them as quoted by his authority, or had never 
seen them at all, but merely adopted the language of his authority in 
speaking about them, need not be discussed at the moment. Those 
who know late Greek literature best seem generally to take the last 
view.) To Pausanias the Cypria and Little Ziad are anonymous poems. 


THE EPIG CYCLE 343 


The Sack of Ilion is by Lescheds.’. The iVostod is anonymous, though 
he knows elsewhere the name of Hégias of Trozén. The Afznyas is by 
‘Prodicus, or whoever else it was’. The Zzedais is ‘ perhaps Homer’ ; 
the Oedifodeta and Lumolpia are anonymous; the Vaupactia are by 
‘Kinaithon or Kreophylus or Peisandros or Hégias’. 

That is, the good authorities, as compared with the Braelas extracts, 
know a great many more poems, and do not pretend to know the authors 
of them. 

4. Wilamowitz proceeds to show that this is the usual language of 
the early Grammatici. The poem is cited without an author: ‘O τὴν 
Πέρσιν, 6 τὴν Μικρὰν ᾿Ιλιάδα, ὁ τοὺς Noorovs ποήσας. Sometimes we find 
οἱ ποήσαντες. Οἱ τὴν Ἡράκλειαν ποήσαντες, Eratosthenes, ap. Strab. 688 ; 
οἱ τῶν Κυπρίων ποηταί, Schol. v. on π 57. What does this plural mean ? 
It means, I think, that many poets had ‘done’ or ‘ made’ the Heracles- 
saga or the Homecomings ; consequently you could represent the sub- 
jects ‘according to’ any one of them. 

Proclus speaks of the Cyc/e as made up ‘out of various poets’. 
Earlier writers would have said, more correctly, ‘out of various poems.’ 
In early times the poem is the datum, the author a matter of conjecture 
or of indifference. It is exceedingly rare to find an author cited alone 
without a poem—I mean, to find the statement ‘ Lesches says’, ‘ Arctinus 
says’, except in one special kind of literature. Such phrases occur freely 
in Clement’s Stromateis (especially the sixth book) and Eusebius’s 
Praeparatio, always in quotations from the so-called ‘ Peripatetic Jew’, 
Aristobulus. Aristobulus wrote about roo B.c. to prove that all Greek 
philosophers had ‘ stolen’ their wisdom from Moses and Solomon, and 
in the course of the argument chose to prove that all the ancient poets 
were habitual thieves. He wrote περὶ κλοπῶν, and says that Homer 
stole from Orpheus ; that Eugammon stole the Zhesprotis from Musaeus ; 
Panyassis stole the Zaking of Oechalia from Kreophylus ; Peisander stole 
the Heracleta from Peisinoos of Lindos. Aristobulus, in fact, was the 
first important writer to get hold of these questions by the wrong end, 
by the conception of literary property, and his misunderstanding haunts 
us still. 

As to the dates commonly assigned to the authors used in the Cycle, 
they are based on statements drawn, at various removes, from the 
Chronicon of Eusebius, which is known to have fallen early into a state 


1 Apparently from a genitive, Λέσχεω Ἰλίου Πέρσις. Pausanias found 
the name only in the genitive and conjectured a nominative Λέσχεως. We 
ourselves are in just the same position about the writer Πτολεμαίου τοῦ 
Ἡφαιστίωνος, quoted in Photius, Is he Ptolemaeus Hephaestio, or Ptolemaeus 
son of Hephaestio? No one knows. 


344 APPENDIX H 


of confusion, and, even if free from contradictions, would be a shaky 
basis. It is the authority, for instance, for the following entries (Wilamo- 
witz, 1. c., p. 348): 
Ol. I. ᾿Αρκτῖνος Μιλήσιος ἐποποιὸς ἤκμαζεν. 
Ol. IV. Eumelus poeta qui Bugoniam et Europiam, et Arctinus qui 
Aethiopidem composuit et Ilii Persin agnoscitur. 
Cinaethus Lacedaemonius poeta qui Telegoniam scripsit agnoscitur. 

Ol. IX. Eumelus Corinthius versificator agnoscitur. 

Ol. XXX. Λέσχης Λέσβιος 6 τὴν μικρὰν Ἰλιάδα ποιήσας, καὶ ᾿Αλκμαίων 

ἤκμαζε. 

Ol. 1111. Ἐὐγάμμων ἹΚυρηναῖος 6 τὴν Τηλεγονίαν ποιήσας ἐγνωρίζετο. 

Thus the ‘Sack of Ilion’ is by Arctinus, Lesches, Augias, as well as 
by Stesichorus. The author of the Ze/egonia is ‘Cinaethus’ in Ol. IV 
and Eugammon in Ol. LIII, nearly two hundred years between them. 
It is not utterly impossible that all these statements may, in a sense, be 
true: the various traditional poems may have been ‘done’ by all these 
poets and others too. But two things are, I think, clear: first, that the 
evidence of Proclus and Eusebius is too weak to support much super- 
structure ; secondly, weak as it is, it gives no support to the notion that 
Lesches, Arctinus, &c., clubbed together to write poems to fill the gaps 
left by Homer. The ‘cycle’ of the epitomator is only ‘made complete 
out of the works of various poets’. And the evidence of the earlier 
and better authorities points steadily towards the hypothesis that has 
generally been urged in this book: that there was a large mass of 
traditional poetry, which was ‘done’ by various poets whose names 
generally remain unrecorded. ‘The legendary matter was then collected 
in cycles—sometimes perhaps in verse, normally (Clem. Al. S¢vom. vi. 
p. 267 Sylb.= vol. 3, p. 112, Klotz) in prose—for educational purposes 
by the scholars of late Alexandrian and Roman times, while the old 
poems themselves passed out of mind and disappeared. 

It is perhaps needless to controvert further the theory that Proclus’s 
account of the Cycle is an accurate account of the old poems out of 
which the cycle was composed, but two test cases may be taken. (Cf. 
Monro, 1. c., who gives more details.) 

1. Herodotus says (ii. 117) that the Cyfrvia are not by Homer because 
the Cyfvia say that Paris reached Ilion on the third day after leaving 
Sparta, with smooth sea and favouring wind, whereas the //ad says he 
wandered or was driven out of his course to Sidon. Proclus on the 
contrary makes the Cypria say that Hera sent a storm upon them and 
Paris was carried to shore at Sidon and took the city. 

What has happened? Herodotus’s criticism has affected either the 


THE: EPIC CYCLE 345 


Cypria themselves, or, more likely, the historical ‘cycle’ which used the 
Cypria. Homer said Alexander went to Sidon, and what Homer said 
must take rank as true. So the cycle-maker adopts Homer’s version. 
(Several similar cases given in Schwartz, Pauly-Wiss. i. 2879.) Whether 
Homer’s version ever got into the text of the Cygr/a, as an independent 
poem, or not, we have no evidence. 

2. Aristotle, Poetics, cap. 23 ad fin., says that out of the Little Ziad 
more than eight tragedies can be made, and suggests ten: Zhe /udge- 
ment of the Arms, Philoctetes, Neoptolemus, Eurypylus, The Begging (ot 
Odysseus in Troy), Ze Laconian Women, The Sack of Troy, The Sailing 
Away, Sinon, and The Trojan Women. Of these ten the first six only 
fall inside the Zittle Iliad of Proclus’s Cycle; the other four would fall 
in Proclus’s Sack of lion. ‘That is, the cycle-maker preferred to follow 
the Sack of Ilion rather than the Zitt/e J/iad for this part of the history. 
There is no difficulty about that. A difficulty is only created by 
imagining that the Cycle which was ‘made complete out of different 
poets’ was really the work of those poets themselves. 

The whole genesis and purpose of these ‘Cycles’ in early Alexandrian 
times is admirably expounded in the article on Apollodorus (61st of that 
name) in Pauly-Wissowa by Schwartz, who understands the mythographical 
literature if any one does. The object is never to give an exact résumé 
or table of contents of a poem; the object is to tell again, in a full and 
connected form, for the purposes of general culture, all that the poets or 
historians have told us of the history of the past. It is concerned not 
with form or poetical beauty but with the ἀκολουθία τῶν πραγμάτων, the 
‘sequence of events’, and it makes that sequence as clear and complete 
as it can. A fair instance is to be found in Hyginus, who uses, directly 
or indirectly, a number of ancient poets, but never attempts to give an 
account of their contents. He simply tells the story afresh, harmonizing 
his sources as best he can, and filling gaps by his own imagination or 
common sense. The cycle-maker of course had the //ad and Odyssey 
before him, and used them as his first and most canonical authorities. 

[See especially Wilamowitz, Homerische Untersuchungen, pp. 328-80 ; 
also Bethe in Hermes xxvi, and the articles by Schwartz on Apollodorus 
(61), Dionysius Skytobrachion (109), and Dionysius ΚΚυκλογράφος (110) 
in Pauly-Wissowa’s Realencyclopidie. An attempt to reassert the old 
(pre-Monro) view is made by T. W. Allen in C. Q., ii (1908). } 


ALPENDIX 1! 


EVIDENCE FOR TRANSLITERATION FROM 
“ΤῊΝ OLD “ALPHABET? 


Cf. Cauer, Grundfragen®, pp. 105 ff. 


A. Definite tradition in the Scholia : 

1. H 238 οἶδ᾽ ἐπὶ δεξιά, οἶδ᾽ ἐπ᾽ ἀριστερὰ νυμῆσαι Bov. βῶν most MSS. 
βοῦν Aristoph. Schol. TV explains ἐν τοῖς παλαιοῖς ἐγέγραπτο BON, 
ὅπερ οὐκ ἐνόησαν οἱ διορθωταί. 

2. α 275 μητέρα δ᾽, εἴ οἱ θυμὸς ἐφορμᾶται γαμέεσθαι, ἂψ ἴτω. Schol. 
τῇ ἀρχαίᾳ συνηθείᾳ ἐγέγραπτο METEP ἀντὶ τοῦ MHTHP. τοῦτο ἀγνοήσας 
τις προσέθηκε τὸ α. 

3. [Add a 52 (OAOOPPON) ἐγέγραπτο κατὰ τὴν ἀρχαίαν γραφήν, εἶτά 
τις μὴ νοήσας προσέθηκε τὸ ΟΣ.] 

4. Ἐ 241 ἐπίσχοιες A and most MSS. in antiquity: nearly all our MSS. 
have émurxoins. Schol. A τῷ ἐπίσχοιμι ἀκόλουθόν ἐστι τὸ ἐπίσχοις, TO δὲ 
ἐπισχοίην τὸ ἐπισχοίης. καὶ ἴσως ἔδει οὕτως ἔχειν, παρεφθάρη δὲ ὑπὸ τῶν 
μεταχαρακτηρισάντων. ἐπισχοίης for ἐπίσχοιες seems to be merely ἃ con- 
jecture of Alexander of Kotyaon, saec. II. a. Ὁ. 

5. A 104 ὦ ποτ᾽ ᾿Αχιλλεύς. Zenodotus ὅν ποτ᾽ ᾿Αχιλλεύς. Aristonicus 
μήποτε πεπλάνηται, γεγραμμένου τοῦ ο ὑπ᾽ ἀρχαϊκῆς σημασίας ἀντὶ τοῦ w, 
προσθεὶς τὸ ν. 

6. Φ 362-3 ὡς δὲ λέβης ζεῖ ἔνδον ἐπειγόμενος πυρὶ πολλῷ, κνίσην 
μελδόμενος ἁπαλοτρεφέος σιάλοιο. In the Geneva Schol. Peisistratus 
of Ephesus and Hermogenes make the correction μελδομένου (with 
σιάλοιο) instead of μελδόμενος (with λέβης) and proceed: γραφομένου 
KNISHMEAAOMENO καὶ οὐ προσκειμένου τοῦ v ὁ μεταγράφων eis τὴν 
νῦν γραμματικὴν οὐκ ἐνόησεν ὅτι MEAAOMENOY ἦν, ἀλλ᾽ ἄνευ τοῦ v 
ἀναγιγνώσκων ἀδιανόητον ἡγεῖτο καὶ ἡμαρτημένον εἶναι, διόπερ προσέθηκε 
ἀντὶ τοῦ υ τὸ σ MEAAOMENOS ποιήσας. We know from the Com- 
mentary of Ammonius (fap. Oxyrh. 221, col. 17, 30 ff.) that this 
correction dates from Crates. 

B. There are further several pretty certain corrections of the text by 
modern scholars which rest on the hypothesis of a ‘ transliteration’. 

I. ἡ 107 καιροσέων δ᾽ ὀθονέων ἀπολείβεται ὑγρὸν ἔλαιον. Lobeck 


EVIDENCE AS TO TRANSLITERATION 347 


explains rightly as KAIPOSEON for καιρουσσέων, fem. gen. pl. of καιρόεις, 
καιρόεσσα. An old Milesian inscription has TEIXIOSHS APXO3, i.e. 
Τειχιούσσης ἀρχός (7. G. A. 488). 

2. T 109 θεουδής supposed to be for θεοδδής (i. 6. θεο- δ ξής, ‘ god-fearing ἢ 
—TI should prefer to take it as θεώδης from θεο- άδης, ‘ god-pleasing’ (so 
Fick): either would be written ΘΕΟΔΈΣ. 

3. K 510 ὠλεσίκαρπος, as Schulze points out, is for οὐλεσίκαρπος : 
written OAE--, 

4. A 359, 7 203 περιώσιος is for περιούσιος (ἃ. Meyer) from περιεῖναι. 

5. 6 408 ἔπος δ᾽ εἴ πέρ τι βέβακται δεινόν, apap τὸ φέροιεν ἀναρπάξασαι 
ἄελλαι. Δεινόν gives a wrong sense: E, Bruhn AENON, i.e. δεννόν 
(= κακολόγον Hesych.), 

6. ναιετάωσαν, ἀρόωσι, δηϊόῳεν, δηϊοῶντες all false forms derived from mis- 
interpretation of NAIETAOSAN, APOOSI, AEIOOIEN, AEIOONTES. 

ἡ. O 635 αἰὲν ὁμοστιχάει. Schol. B συμπορεύεται: βάρβαρον δέ φησιν 
εἶναι αὐτὸ Διονύσιος. Bekker ὁμοῦ στιχάει (OMOSTIXAE]D),. 

8. Z 344 and I 64 κακομηχάνου ὀκρυοέσσης and ἐπιδημίου ὀκρυόεντος. 
Payne-Knight saw that the true forms were κακομηχάνοο κρυοέσσης, 
ἐπιδημίοο κρυόεντος : misinterpretation of KAKOMEXANOOKPYOE3XE3S, 
ELTIMAEMIOOKPYOENTOS. 

9. Η 434 τῆμος ap ἀμφὶ πυρὴν κριτὸς ἔγρετο λαὸς ᾿Αχαιῶν and Q 789 
τῆμος ap ἀμφὶ πυρὴν κλυτοῦ Ἕκτορος ἔγρετο λαός. ἔγρετο means 
‘woke’: Diintzer corrects ἤγρετο, ‘was gathered’: the MS. text is 
a misinterpretation of ETPETO. 

10. Τ' 416 μέσσῳ δ᾽ ἀμφοτέρων μητίσομαι ἔχθεα λυγρά is difficult to 
understand. Perhaps ΜΈΣΟΙ really meant MH ΣΟΙ; this involves 
changing δ᾽ to γ᾽, but is a great improvement. 

11. ὠμηστής is perhaps wrong for ὠμεστής (ἀπὸ τοῦ ὠμὰ ἐσθίειν). Of 
course the analogy of ἀρχηστής is amply enough to account for the η, 
but it may be pre-Greek (Sanscr. amad-). 

C. The same cause may have helped in many of the common 
modernizings of Homeric language (εἰργάζετο from EPPAZETO, ἐῴκει 
from EOIKEI, ἕως τέως from HEOS TEOX, τεθνειὼς στείομεν εἵαται from 
TEQNEOS XSTEOMEN HEATAI: see Wackernagel in Lezzend. Beitr. 
iv. pp. 265 ff.), but of course there are quantities of similar moderniza- 
tions and Atticisms in which no such cause can have helped: ἰέναι 
for ἴμεναι, μειλιχίοις ἐπέεσσι for μειλιχίοισι βέπεσσι, nv που for ai κεν, 
&c. See Prof. Platt’s texts of the Z/iad and Odyssey, or Van Leeuwen’s. 


348 


APPENDIX J 


THE CATALOGUE AS A ‘LEGAL DOCUMENT’ 


Mr. ALLEN in Zhe Homeric Catalogue of Ships treats the Catalogue 
as a sort of legal document, ‘an international authority’ (p. 28), ‘a 
document constituting a title’ (p. 38), and argues that for any one in 
antiquity to tamper with its text would be like falsifying a will or a 
charter, ‘a forgery made with a material and quasi-legal purpose’. I do 
not see how such a view can be reconciled with the actual facts of the 
text of Β ; for instance, the many variant readings shown in Mr. Allen’s 
own edition ; but apart from this difficulty the whole theory appears to 
me to rest on a misunderstanding. 

We all know that the Greeks habitually used the traditional legends 
as evidence, or at least as ornament, to support political claims. If the 
legend could be backed by a quotation from Homer or some ancient 
poet, so much the better, though I know of no instance in which such 
evidence was accepted by the Court as decisive. Thus in Hdt. ix. 26, 
27 the Tegeans and Athenians bring up καινὰ καὶ παλαιά to justify their 
respective claims to a post of honour, all about the Heracleidae, and 
the expedition of Polynices and the Amazons. So in Hdt. v. 94 the 
Athenians argue that the Mytileneans have no more right to Sigeum than 
any other of the Greek peoples who συνεπρήξαντο Μενέλεῳ τὰς Ἑλένης 
ἁρπαγάς. Periander decided the dispute by letting each side keep what 
they had got. In vii. 161 a definite reference to Homer is added to 
other arguments. The Athenians refuse to yield supremacy at sea 
to the Syracusans, because (1) they have had for some time the largest 
naval force in Greece ; (2) they are αὐτόχθονες, the only Greeks who 
have never been driven from their country; (3) ‘Homer the poet says 
that Menestheus was the best marshaller of an army at Troy’. The 
Homeric reference adds ornament and point to the claim, but is very 
far removed from being the citation of an ‘ authoritative legal document’, 

It will be noticed that these references to Homer are all made by 
Athenians. By the fourth century it looks as if the knowledge of our 
text was more widespread, for the Phocians support their claim to the 
possession of Delphi at the opening of the Sacred War, 357 B.c., by ἃ 


THE CATALOGUE AS A ‘LEGAL DOCUMENT’ 349 


definite quotation of B 519, where the Phocians hold ‘ Kyparissos and 
rocky Pytho’: quite a good argument as it happens, but one which had 
no effect in convincing the other side. 

The Solon anecdote is often misrepresented, as if it stated that in the 
dispute with Megara about Salamis Solon had produced the sacred text 
B 558 στῆσε δ᾽ ἄγων ἵν᾿ ᾿Αθηναίων ἵσταντο φάλαγγες, and the Court 
immediately bowed to its authority. Its point is quite different. It is 
that the line, which looks on the face of it like a forgery, was actually 
forged by Solon or Pisistratus on the occasion of the arbitration about 
Salamis. No ancient author treats the anecdote very seriously. Strabo 
does not believe it. Quintilian quotes it merely to illustrate a technical 
point. Plutarch says that the Athenians consider it ‘nonsense’ (φλυαρία) 
and give the real arguments which they allege to have been used by 
their representative at the arbitration. 

The only texts which give any semblance of support to Mr. Allen’s 
view of the ‘international title-deeds’ are some rhetorical phrases in the 
Scholia, especially Schol. B on B 494: ‘So sweet and gorgeous is the 
Catalogue that cities use the verses of Homer in their contentions. He 
it was who presented Calydon to the Aetolians ... the people of Abydos 
won Sestos from the Athenians by quoting B 836: two lines sufficed to 
give victory to the Milesians against Priene (868 f.); Solon handed 
Salamis to the Athenians by adding the line 558.’ ‘This may very 
suitably be termed φλυαρία. For my own part I doubt if, among the 
innumerable changes which have occurred in the text of Homer between 
the time of their first commission to writing and the age of Aristarchus, 
there have been any number worth considering due to the motive of 
‘deliberate fraud for a material purpose’. Even the passage about 
Salamis, obviously ‘ cooked’ as it is, is not quite that. It is more like 
an awkward patch made to cover up a hole. No one could expect the 
Athenians to enjoy the public recitation of a passage of genuine 
traditional Homer which showed that Salamis was independent, and their 
own seizure of it ‘unjust’. Hence the original lines about Ajax were 
omitted. Then the gap had to be filled, as unostentatiously as possible, 
in such a way as not to annoy the public. 


ns om haw ; 


esa * Ἧ iG 


bet ‘tise sis + Ξ 


Sis 


ἐν" ere F eds Ah “ὦ τὰν» δῖ 


bids Wh ᾿ 


INDEX 


Achaeans, v, 39, 45, 48 ff., 68 ff. 

Achilles, 29, 33, 72, 83, 84, 141 ff., 
185 f., 204, 206 ff., 224 ff. 

Adrastus, 72, 179 n., 221, 223, 

Aegean races, 9, 27, 38; 588, 52, 
322 ἢ: 

Aeolis, 232, 235. 

Aeschylus, 5.57.04: 71, ἢ, 65 ἢ; 
50. 17 125 ., 131 Ὡς, 165 n., 275 f., 
297, 298, e¢ passim. 

Aethiopis, 341, 342. 

Agamemnon, 30, 33, 48, 128, 200 ἔ, 
207, ἢ, 227 

Agar, xv. 

Ahmad bin Abubekr, 98 n. 

Aias, 29, 33, 123, 185 n., 215, 246. 

Aidoios, 87 f. 

Aidos, 83-90. 

‘ Akhaiusha,’ &c., 208, 230 f. 

Alcinoiis, 125. 

Alexander the Great, 105 f., 199; cf. 
Callisthenes. 

Alexandrian expurgation, 124 n. 

Alexandrian scholars, 283 ff., and cf. 
Aristarchus and Zenodotus. 

Alexandros, 224, 226. 

Alexis, Vie de St., 335 ff. 

Allbutt, Sir C., 4 ἢ. 

Allen, T. W., vi, xiv, 35 n., 178 ἢ. 
180n., 286, 337, 345, 348. 

Altars, 163. 

Ammonius, 295. 

Androktasiai, 221 ff. 

Andromache, 133 f., 225. 

Antigonus of Carystus, 299. 

Apamea, 21. 

᾿Αφίκτωρ, 86 n., 275. 

Apollo, 49 f., 70, 73. 

Apollodorus, 340. 

Apollonius of Kitium, 4. 

*Apaios, 88. 

Archaism in Pentateuch, 115 ff. 

— in Homer, 116. 

Arctinus, 341, 342, 343 f. 

Areté, 59. 

Arétéres, 72, 163. 

Argos, 29, 209. 

Aristarchus, 123 f., 157, 244 n., 283 ff., 
296. 

Aristides of Miletus, 268 f., 273. 

Aristobulus, 343. 


Aristophanes, I, 19, e¢ assim. 

Aristophanes Byzantius, 123, 346. 

Aristotle, 17, 345, ef passim. 

Armour, 147-61. 

Artist’s view of life, 24 1. 

Asceticism, 25 f. 

Assyrians, 14, 21, 323. 

Athena, 49, 66, 191; contest with 
Poseidon, 313. 

Athenaeus, 125 n., 342. 

Athenian interpolations, 301. 

Athenians, 2, 52; law, 20 n.; spirit, 


279 f. 

Attic Alphabet, 302 f. 

Attic influence, 301-8, 312 ff.; cf. 
Catalogues. 

Axe God, 28. 


Baalsnrgat. 

Bards, 184. 

Barnes, 170 n. 

Beazley, 48. 

Bechtel, 168 n. 

Bédier, J., 170 n., 192 n. 

Bellerophon, 134, 175 ff. 

Beloch, 31 n. 

Bérard, 31 ἢ; 34)14y100: 

Bethe, v, xiil, 31, 124n., 138 n., 185 n., 
204 Ἧς. 220N., 223, 227, 241. 340; 
345- 

Blass, 125 n. 

Blood, sacrificial, 61 ft. 

Boeotia, 52. 

Bolte, 94 n. 

Book, Traditional, lect. iv. 

Bosheth, 117. 

Bouphonia, 63. 

Box, 244 n. 

Bréal, 143 n., 167 n., 187 n., 248 n. 

Breasted, 231 n. 

Briareos, 249 n., 269. 

Briseis, 204. 

Bronze and Iron, 159 ff. 

‘Bronzen Men,’ 147 ff. 

Browne, xv. 

Burnet, 40, 236. 

Burrows, 28 n., 30 n., 31 n. 44 n.,, 
148 n., 152 ἢ. 

Bury, 33, 217, 231 n. 

Butcher, 94 n. 


352 


Cadmus, 31. 

Calendar, 136 n., 211. 

Callimachus, 92, 136 n. 

Callisthenes, 105 f. 

Carpenter, Estlin, 95 n. 

Catalogues, in Hesiod, 100; in //ad, 
178-80, 187, 202 ff., 296; in Cyfria, 
179 n., 180; in /ph. Aul., 179 N. ; 
of Women, 288 n. 

Cauer, P., vif., xiii, 152 n., 167 n., 209, 
242 n., 283 n., 288 n., 302, 303 n. 
Chadwick, v f., 49 n., 57, 74 n., 196 ff., 

201, 207 n., 227 & 

Chariots, 152 and n. 

Cheyne, 52 n. 

Chios, 55 f., 261. 

Choirilos, 309. 

Chronicles, Arabic, spirit of, 169 ff. 

Cibber, C., 104. 

Cicero, 304 ff. 

Cinaethus, 344. 

Classicism, 5 f. 

Classics, meaning of, 3 ff. 

Clement, 343. 

Colophon, 55. 

Comedy, New, 18. 

Commerce, Aegean, 34 ff. 

Condorcet, 23. 

Conway, 44 n. 

Cook, Α. B., 41 ἢ. 78 ἢ., 82 ἢ., 138 
and n., 329. 

Corinthiaca, 176f., 177 n. 

Cornford, 25 n., 280 n., 328. 

Cowley, 45 n., 231 n. 

Crates, 305, 346. 

Creon, 30. 

Crete, 28, 30, 31, 42, 161 n., 220, 221. 

Cruelty, 21, 126 f. 

Cruickshank, viii. 

Cycle, Epic, 177, 298, 307, 339-45. 

Cyclops, 201. 

Cypria, 131 n., 172, 179 f., 187, 298, 
339, 340, 344 f. 


Dark Age, 27, 53, 57 f. 

David, 119n., 140 f. 

Dead, the, 70-5. 

Deification of kings, 135-40; cf. 
chap. vill. 

Deiphobus, 226. 

Delian Maidens, 238 f. 

Della Seta, 168 n. 

Delos, 191 f. 

Demeter, Hymn to, 337 ff. 

Demolins, 48 n. 

Deuteronomists, 59, 108, 119f., 141 n. 

Deuteronomy, 59, 107 ff., 178, 315. 


THE RISE OF THE "GREEK EPIC 


Dicaearchus, 3 n. 

Dictys Cretensis, 213 ἢ. 

Diels, 288, 339. 

Dieterich, 138 n. 

Dieuchidas of Megara, 304, 305 n. 

Diké, 327. 

Diodorus, 1, 324, ef saepe. 

Diomedes, 183, 215 f. 

Dionysius, 2, 42 n. 

Dionysus, 25, 176, 274. 

Dipylon shield, 147 n. 

Disturbing influences in ancient re- 
cords, 114-17, 173, 193. 

Dittenberger, 136 n. 

Doloneia, 296. See K. 

Dorians, 39, 132. 

Δῶρον, 39 ἢ. 

Dorpfeld, 161 n. 

Δουπῆσαι, 244 n. 

Doutté, 276 n. 

Drerup, vi, xili, 94 ἢ., 122 n., 161. 

Drewitt, 168 n. 

Driver, 52 n., 109, 178. 

Diimmler, 204 ἢ. 

Diintzer, 347. 


Farle, M. L., 243 n., 295 and ἢ. 
Educational use of Homer, 142 f. 
"ENE, 65. 

Elohist, 108-18. 

᾿Εννέωρος, 136 f. 

Eotaz, 288 ἢ. 

Ephesus, 55, 261. 

Epideictica, 194. 

Epigoni, 33. 

Etruscans, 42, 43 n. 

Eumelus of Corinth, 176, 343. 

Euripides, 11, 19, 48 n., 75 ἢ.) 82 n., 
89 n., 179 n., εἴ saefe. 

Eusebius, 343 f. 

Eustathius, 136 n., 296 ἢ. 

Evans, A., 32 n., 51 n., 75 n., 162 n., 
182 n. 

Expurgation in Homer, xi, 120-44; 
Alexandrian, 121 f. (in Pentateuch, 
115-10) ; dates of, 263 ; in Hymns, 
337 ff. 


Falstaff, 200. 

Farnell, 78 n., 131 n., 139 n., 338. 
Fick, xiv, 44 n., 233, 240, 347. 
Fiction, 167-74, chap, viii. 
Finsler, xili, 167 ἢ. 

Flach, 170 ἢ. 

Fotheringham, 322 n. 

Four-year festivals, 136-8 f. 
Fraenkel, vii. 

Frazer, 47 n., 75 n., 77, 78 n. 


INDEX 


Friedlander, P., 242 n. 
Fries, Carl, 212 n. 
Frost, 195 n. 


Galen, 4. 

Ganymedes, 124 n. 

Garstang, 45 n. 

Gauthier, L., 96 n. 

Gennep, van, xiv. 

Genner, E. E., viii. 

George, St., 199. 

Gerhardt, 292 n. 

Gibbon, 48 n. 

Gilgamesh, 199 f. 

Girard, P., 215 n. 

Glaucus, 220 n. 

Gods, 49, 68 ff.; tribal, 206-27; 
zoomorphic, 135-8, 276 f.; and 
men (see Kings), 135-40; Homeric, 
265 ff.; battles of, 269; in Aeschylus, 
275 ff. 

Grammata, 97-8. 

‘Great Age,’ xii. 

Greaves, I5I ἢ. 

Greek people, 38 ff.; and Roman, 
gi f.; and Hebrew, 193 f.; Proto- 
Greeks, 40. 

Grenfell and Hunt, 292 f. 

Griffith, 95 n., 125. 

Grote, 120. 

Guiscard, Robert, 47. 


Hall, 231 ἢ. 

Halliday, W. R., 66 n., 95 n., 338. 

Hamlet, IoI-3. 

Hammurabi, 113, 165 n. 

Harrison, Miss J. E., 48n.,63n.,71n., 
75 n.,76n., 84 n., 267 n. 

Hector, 29, 126, 141, 225 f. 

Helbig, 167 n. 

Helen, 30, 205 f., 226, 253 f., 260. 

Hellenism, to ff., 24, 139 f. 

Hentze, 168 n. 

Hera, 79, 267, 271 ff. 

Fleracleia, 180, 241 n., 272. 

Heraclides Ponticus, 306 n. 

Hermann, E., xiii. 

Hermann, G., 295 n. 

Herodotus, 2, 42,210, 344 f.,e¢ assim. 

Heroes (see Dead), 70 ff. 

Heroic Age, 57, 121, 143. 

Hesiod, 65, 81 ff., 87, 129, 136 n., 139, 
158, 269, 288 

Hiller, 299 n. 

Hipparchus, 305. 

Hippocrates, 4, 212. 

Hippostratus, 308. 


353 

History in Homer, lect. viii, 196-218, 
315. 

Hittites, 44; Language, 44 n., 45 n. 

Hittoid people, 4o. 

Hoffmann, O., 46 n. 

Hogarth, D. G., 45 n., 56n. 

Hollis, 66 n. 

Homer, 93, 238, e¢ assim; meaning 
of, 297 ff. 

Homéridae, 257, 307. 

florkos, 328. 

Houses in Homer, 165 f. 

Hubris, 327. 

Human sacrifice, 11-15, 21, 130-7, 
EAY £5,317 tke 

Hunt, 286, 292 f. 

Hyginus, 222, 345. 

Hymn to Apollo, 288 n. 


Idomeneus, 48, 127, 220. 

Iliad, meaning of name, 183; what 
itis, 186; recitation of, 188 ff. ; sub- 
ject of, 231 f.; language of, 233 ff., 
244 f., 256; criticism of, 238 ff. ; 
composition of, 239; similes, 245 
ff.; ‘fire,’ 254; incidents of the 
story, 295. 

ltiad, the Little, 181, 341. 

Tliu Persis, 126 ἢ. 

Imagination, 251 ff. 

Inchbald, Mrs., 102. 

Infanticide, 164. 

Io in Aeschylus, 276 ff. 

Ion, 300. 

Ionia, 56, 57, 189 ff., 235 f., 261 ft. 

Ionian Alphabet, 303. 

Ionic MSS., 302. 

Iphigenia, 131. 

Iphigenia in Aulis, 179 n., 297. 

Iron Age, 81. 

Isaeus, 77 n. 

Isaiah, 70 n., 178, 240. 

Isocrates, I n., 193 n., 300. 

Istros, 213 n., &c. 


Jahn-Michaelis, 299 n., 341. 
Jahvist, 108-19. 

Jebb, vii. 

Jehu, 253, 260. 

Jendeus de Brie, 96 n. 
Jeremiah, 178. 

Jews, 14, 108-19, 193. 
Josiah, 108, 141. 

Judges, Book of, 112, 170-172. 
K, xiv, 158 f., 183 n., 296 f. 
Kennett, 240 n. 

Kerkidas, 82 n., 89. 


354 THE RISE 


Kings, Book of, 59, 178, 253. 
Kings, Divine, 21, 135-40. 
Kinkel, 340. 

Κλῃδοῦχος, 139. 

Kochly, 296. 

Korai, 75 f., 265. 

Koran, 99 n. 

Kouros, 75 f. 

Κράτος καὶ Bin, 136 n. 
Kretschmer, 44 n., 46 ἢ. 
Kynaithos, xii, 308, 318 f. 


Lang, Andrew, viii, xif., 70 n., 74 n., 
95 n., 138n., 147 n., 152 n., 168 n., 
196 


Language of Homer, ν, ix f., 168, 244. 

Leaf, W., 35 n., 43 n., 47 n., 65, 139; 
159, 167 n., 178 n., 180, 180 n., 
τοῖα, 163 ἢ, 196 ff., 248 n., 271, 
310. 

Lear, 103 f. 

Leeuwen, Van, xv, 128 n., 235 n., 347. 

Lehrs, 244 n. 

Lemnos, 56. 

Lesches, 344. 

Levantine, 21 n. 

Lippold, 147 n., 151 n., 167. 

Lizards, 70. 

Local worships, 145, 227, 265 f. 

Locrians at Ilium, 224, 227. 

Logos, 94. 

Ludwich, 284 n., 285, 286, 295 n. 

Lycurgus the orator, 300. 

Lycurgus of Thrace, 176. 

Lysias, 193 ἢ. 


Mackail, 239, 254. 

Mackenzie, 148 n., 168 n. 
Macurdy, 36 n., 154, 218, 231. 
Mana, 136 n. 

Margoliouth, 99 n., 109 n., 112, 
Marriage customs, 164 ff. 
Marsyas, 21. 

Masks, 132 f. 

Matrilinear systems, 47 n., 77 ff. 
Mauss et Durkheim, 328. 
Mayer, 12 n., 139 ἢ. 

Meillet, 53 n. 

Meister, 48 n., 214 n. 
Melanippus, 72, 225. 
Menelaus, 30, 226. 

Meton’s cycle, 211 ff. 

Meusel, 106, 330. 

Meyer, C., 35 n., 195 n. 
Meyer, P., 264 n. 

Mice, 70. 

Migrations, 39 ff., 47 ff., 67. 


OF THE: GREEK EPIC 


Milesian Stories, 268 f.; tone in 
Homer, 271 ff. 

Minoan Civilization, 9, 27-38. 

Minos, 30, 48, 137. 

Minotaur, 137 f., n. 

Mixture of poems, 286 f. 

Mohammed, 112. 

Moloch, 117. 

Monro, 166 n., 234 n., 341, 344. 

Montelius, 160. 

Moret, 138 n. 

Mosso, 152 ἢ. 

Milder, xiv, 143 π΄, 152 n., 179 τ 
181 f., 185 n., 242 n., 249 n., 274 Nn. 

Miller, K., 106, 329. 

Muses, 69, 96. 

Mutilation, 74, 128 f. 

Mycenae, 29, 34 f. 

Myres, J. L., 32 n., 36.n., 42, 43, 
131 n., 148 n., 166, 218, 322 n., 323. 

Myrsilus, 48 n. 


Nandi, 66 n. 

Nemesis, 82 ff. 

Nibelungentied, 106, 201. 

‘ Nine Years,’ 136 ἢ. 

Noack, 168 n. 

Noldeke, 331. 

Normans, 47 f. 

Northerners, 39 ff., 47 f., e¢ saefe. 
Nostalgie de la boue, 10, 140. 
Nostoi, 341. 


Odell, on Shakespeare, 103-5. 

Odysseus, 29, 33, 210 ff. 

Odyssey, 125-35, 158 f., 187. 

Ololigé, 66. 

Olympian gods, 235 ἢ.» 265 f.; see 
Gods. 

Oracles, 72 f. 

Originality, 249 ft. 

Orpheus, Hymn to Demeter, 337 ff. 

Othin, 49 n. 

Ox, sacrifice of, 61 ff. 


P., writer in Pentateuch, 109-19. 

Paganism, 8 ff. 

Paley, 187, 188 n. 

Pamphylian, 53 n. 

Pan, 275 n. 

Panathenaea, Recitation at, 188 ff., 
299 ff., 307 ff. 

Panegyris, 192 ff. 

Panhellenes, 145, 189 f. 

Paniones, 189 f. 

Panyassis, 242 n., 343. 

Papias, 95 n. 


INDEX 


Papua, 66. 

Papyri, 164 n., 286, 287. 

Paribeni, 152 ἢ. 

Paris: see Alexandros, 

Paris, Gaston, 106 f., 274 n., 331 f. 

Paterson, W. R., 130 ἢ. 

Patriarchal systems, 77 ff., 8o. 

Pausanias, 134 n., 342, e¢ passim. 

Payne-Knight, 347. 

Peake, 218. 

Pegasus, 176 n. 

Peisander, 242-n., 343. 

Peisinoos, 242 n. 

Pelasgoi, 41 ff. 

Pélerinage de Charlemagne, 192 n., 
274 ἢ. 

Pelopidas, 15, 320 f. 

Pelops, 12 n., 47n., 139 and n., 208 f. 

Pentateuch, 108-19; interpolations 
in, 193. 

‘Peoples of the Sea,’ 208, 230 f. 

Phaestus, 221. 

Pharmakol, 12 ff., 214, 317 ff. 

Phoenix, 123. 

Photius, 340. 

Phrixus, 72. 

Phrygians, 46. 

Piety, 80. 

Pindar, 137, 210, 308, e¢ passim. 

Piracy, 53- 

Pisander, 242 n. 

Pisistratus, xi f., 190 ff., 296, 304 ff., 
307 ff., 313. 

Plato, 1, 16, e¢ passim; Laws, 16 n, 

Platt, xv, 245, 347. 

Plays, Traditional, 100-5. 

Pliny, 2. 

Plutarch, 13, 64 n., 66 n., 123, 320 f. 

Poet of the //éad, 239-42. 

Poetry, 6 f., 22; Hebrew, 169. 

Poisoned arrows, 129 f. 

Polts, 11, 58. 

Pollard, 200 ἢ. 

Polybius, 2, 18. 

Polyxena, 131. 

Povelsen, 128 n. 

Preuss, 124 n. 

Priam, 29. 

Proclus, 340 ff., 344. 

Progress, 1 f., 22 ff. 

Prometheus, 278 f. 

Προστρύόπαιος, 88, 

Protagoras, 19 n. 

Proto-Greeks, 40. 

Pseudo-Callisthenes, 105 f., 329 ff. 

Πτολίπορθος, 51. 

Puritan view of life, 24. 


355 


Quotations in Homer and Pentateuch, 
17. ἢ: 

Quotations from Homer, 289-95, 
297 f.; how to use, 290; in Plato, 
293. 

Radermacher, 262 n. 

Ramsay, W. M., 75 n., 162 n. 

Reichel, 149 n., 151 n., 155 n., 159, 
162, 167 n. 

Reinach, Α. 1., xiv. 

Reinach, Th., 49 n. 

Religion of the Podzs, 58; local, 145, 
227, 265 f.; Homeric, 145, 265. 

Repetitions of incidents, 310 f. 

Rhapsode, 307. 

Rhesus, 297. 

Rich men in Homer, go. 

kichard 771, 104 f. 

Ridgeway, 30 ἢ.) 40 n., 41 n., 45, 
150, 159, 168 n. 

Robert, K., 151 n., 167 n. 

Rohde, 317. 

Roland, Song of, 106 f., 230, 331 ff. 

Roman character, 91. 

Rothe, xili and n., 186 n. 

Rutherford, 97 n. 

Rzach, 245. 


Sack of Llion, 341 ff. 

Sacrifice, 61 ff., 66 f. 

St. Alexis, 335 ff. 

Samuel, 74 n., I11, 119 n., 132 ἢ: 

Sarpedon, 219 and n., 220 ἢ. 

Sartiaux, 36 n., 218 ἢ. 

Sayce, 188 ἢ. 

Scholia, 133 n., 173 n., 283, 308, 340, 
et passim. 

Schulz, 264 n. 

Schurtz, 76 n. 

Schwartz, 339, 345. 

Scott, J. A., 168 ἢ. 

Seeck, 212 n., 302 n. 

Sengebusch, 295 n. 

*Sennachie,’ 95 n. 

Service of man, I. 

Sexual expurgations, 120 ft. 

Seymour, ΧΙ]. 

Sheppard, vii. 

Shewan, xiv, 168 ἢ. 

Shield of Heracles, 288 n. 

Shorey, vii. 

Signs, Aristarchean, 283. 

Similes and narrative, 122 n., 245 ff. 

Simonides, 210. 

Slavery, 15 ff., 89 ἢ.) 322. 

a Robertson, 61 ff., 64 n., 132, 
162 n, 


356 


Smyrna, 236, 261. 

Sophocles, 87 n., 133, 297, 298, e¢ 
2α551771. 

Sophrosyne, 26. 

Sources of //iad, 178 ff. 

Stawell, xiv, 168 n. 

Stengel, 320. 

Stesichorus, 210, 342. 

Stones thrown in battle, 153. 

Strabo, 55 n., 137 n., 343, e¢ assim. 

Style, epic, 159 f., 167-9. 

Susemihl, 284 n., 295 n. 


Tantalus, 48 n., 209. 

Tate, Nahum, 103 f. 

Taurus, 32 n. 

Telamon, 35, 215. 

Telegonita, 341. 

Telemachus, 174. 

Temples, 163 f. 

Text, xi, chap. xii ; Pre-Alexandrian, 
285, 286, 314. 

Θ, 289, 294. 

Thalassocrats, 322 ff. 

Thales, 263. 

Thebais, 179 n., 181 f., 298 f., 339. 

Thebes, 31. 

Themistocles, 13. 

Theodorus, 341, 342. 

Theognis, 143. 

Theogony, 288 n. 

Theomachia, 269 f. 

Θεύς, 136 n. 

Thersites, 212-14, 128. 

Thomson, J. A. K., v, vili, 40 f., 235 
Ὧν, 236 n. 

Θωρήσσεσθαι, 155 ἢ. 

Thorex, 154-7. 

Thucydides, 2 e¢ passim. 

Thumb, 53 n., 234 n. 

Tiryns, 29. 

Titanomachia, 269. 

Tlepolemus, 219. 

Tophet, 14. 

Torture expurgated, 126 f. 

Τοξικόν, 129 n. 

Traditional Books, characteristics of, 
255 ff. and lect. iv. 

Tragedy, 19, 275, 297. 

Tragedy less expurgated, 126, 130 f., 
263 n. 

Transliteration, 302 f. 

Trinities, 219 n. 

Troad, 46. 


THE RISE OF THE’ GREEK EPIC 


Trojans, Horse-taming, 36, 154 n. 
Allies, 37. 

Trophonius, 73. 

Troy, 27, 32, 35, 48 ff., 51. 

Tsountas and Manatt, 167 n. 

Tiimpel, K., 204 n. 

Twelve Gods, 235 n. 

Tylor, Prof., 78 n. 

Tyrtaeus, 136 n., 149 n. 


Unchastity, pre-Greek, 20; expur- 
gated, 120. 

Understanding of Greek poetry, 7 f. 

Unitarians, vili f., 239-42. 

Unity of liad, ix, 309. 

Usener, 139 n., 214. 


Valckenaer, 297 n. 

Van Leeuwen, 128, 245, 257. 
Vase painters, 298. 

Vergil, 2 n., 126. 

Verrall, 279 n., 300 n., 302 ἢ. 
Vinogradoff, 20 n., 78 ἢ. 
Virgins sacrificed, 132. 
Vulgate, 282 ff. 


Wackernagel, vi, 215 n., 347. 

Wall, see Polis; Wallin “αι, 243 f., 
295 f. 

Weber, 45 n. 

Webster, 76 n. 

Wecklein, 186 n. 

Welcker, 297 n. 

Weyland Smith, 200, 

Wheeler, Prof., 280 n. 

Wide, Sam., 227 n. 

Wilamowitz, v, xiii, 49 n., 56 n., 135, 
149 n., 179 n., 1900 Ὡ;, 20, π|, 
236 n., 299 ἢ.) 303 n., 339, 343» 


345+ 

Winckler, 44 n., 322 n. 

Wolf, 285. 

Women in Athens, 15, 19 ff. ; in Dark 
Age, 77 ff.; in Homer, 133 ἢ, 
164 f. 

Wooden Horse, 33. 

Wrath-Lays, 33, 184, 206. 


Xenophanes, 263 f. 


Zenodotus, 123 f., 157, 158, 283 f., 
339, 346. 

Zeus, 49, 68 ff., 137 n., 209, 267, 271, 
277 ff. 

Zimmern, 18 n. 

Zoomorphic gods, 28, 138. 


4 


ἃ ἐπ ἃ 
ΟΣ τς 


ae — SSS 
a ΞΟ τ τς, 


| 


Tia 
mes 
τὴν 


ee 


PA Murray, Gilbert 

3105 The rise of the Greek epic. 
M35 3d ed., rev. and enl. 

1924 


PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE 
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET 


UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY 


V 


ND “eee @. 


eee we ee νν 


SS 


rs paede eee 
eat ΣΥ͂Σ 


wae 


nrieieecs*. ia b ; = Ξ δ = 
ἠξέ- ἢ Serene aps ness tHe ge PS ee gas see 


stay 


τοῦ 


ἬΝ 


