Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on Hbrary shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http : //books . google . com/| 



G,}-. 0,4. k(. 7 
A 




FHARVARD- GOLLEGE-UBRARY  

f -t PROM THB BEQUEST of  

■EDWARD-HENRY-HALL- 
1;. — -CLASS OF 16^1 -' — i 




1 



=1 



A 



I 




THE UNITY OF HOMER 



THE UNITY OF HOMER 



JOHN A. SCOTT 

raom*OK OP CRiiE ih horthwutikh UNinurnr 

SATHIX FKOFiaSOX OF CLAUrCAL UTtNATVIll IN THI 

T or cAuroRHiA, mi 



SATHER CLASSICAL LECTURES 
VOLUME ONE 




THE UNIVERSITY OP CALIFORNIA PRESS 

BERKELEY, CALIFORNIA 

1821 










4 •^V < <** ^^' ' ^'• 






CONTENTS 

PAOX 
L HOICXB AlCONO THE AnOIBNT ObXBXS , 1 

II. Thb Aboumxnts of Wolf 39 

III. The Linouistio Aboumxnts 73 

IV. The Amnguinxs and Kindbo) Mattibs 106 

V. Th« COMT&ADICnOKS 137 

i/vL Thx Individualization of Godb and Heboxs 172 

i^II« HxoTO& ..^.........i.^.^.^....^.^^............^*^..^.....^.....^.....^^.. 205 

VnL The Iliad and the Odtssxt 240 



CHAPTER I 
HOMER AMONG THE ANCIENT GREEKS 

The great fact of ancient Greece is the poetry 
of Homer, which was the center of education, the 
source of mythology, the model of literature, the 
inspiration of artists; known and quoted by all. 
Homer was a poet of such authority, even in 
matters not poetic, that contending states were 
supposed to have settled their claims to territory 
on the interpretation of his verses. Passing west- 
ward the power of Homeric verse transformed 
the Latin tongue, making the Romans abandon 
their own poetic forms and forcing that language, 
with its long case endings, to march in dactylic 
rhythms. The oldest Latin literature of which | 
any fragments have been preserved is a version ^ 
of the Odyssey, and the greatest poetic production 
of Roman Italy is the Aeneid of Vergil, a literary 
amalgamation and adaptation of both the Iliad 
and the Odyssey. Homer was thus in turn to in- 
spire the genius of Dante ; and the introduction of 
Milton's Paradise Lost, "Sing, heavenly Muse,*' 
shows the kinship of that poem also with Homeric • 
poetry. 

Nothing could better illustrate the preeminence 
of Homer than the fact that among the papyrus 



2 THE UNITY OP HOMEB 

fragments discovered in Egypt four hundred and 
seventy are from the works of writers previously 
known, of which two hundred and seventy, far 
more than half, are from Homer. Demosthenes 
comes second with but thirty, and Plato, with only 
twenty, comes third.* 

This popularity of Homer in Egypt is in keep- 
ing with the best opinion of classical Greece, for 
Plato, who reached manhood during the life of 
Sophocles and of Euripides, regarded Homer as 
the greatest of all the tragic poets; and oddly 
enough the genuine works of Plato contain hardly 
a verse from those mighty dramatists, although 
they are the most quotable of poets, while Homer 
is quoted more than one hundred times, many 
of these quotations containing several verses.* 
To the mind of the ancient world Homer stood 
quite alone, so that that great judge of literature, 
the Latin QuintUian, could say that Homer was 
to be approached by none and that it was a mark 
of ability to be able to appreciate him (x, 1, 50). 
Horace, whose own poetry is sufficient guaranty 
of his literary acumen, refers to Homer as the 
poet of perfect taste, qui nil molitur inepte {Ars 
Poetica 140). 

This first and gn^eatest of poets lives only in 
his poetry. In that poetry he tells us absolutely 
nothing about himself, his name, his home, his 

1 Kenjon, Journal of Hellenie SivdieM, 1010, 1 ff. 

s Howes, ''Homerie Quotations in Plato and Aristotle/' Har- 
yard Studies, VI, 165. Aescbylns is quoted in Sep, n, 362 A; 
Euripides, in the spurious Aloihiade$ n, 151 B. 



HOMER AMONG THE ANCIENT GBEEKS 3 

age, or his ancestors; and we can only surmise 
his religious and political ideas as we read these 
ideas into the actions or descriptions of the poems. 

Homer was such a master of dramatic narra- 
tive that each character represents only himself. 
When once Nestor, Achilles, Helen, Hector, or 
Agamemnon has been brought into action, each V 
seems to live his own life, free to act or to speak 
as he pleases, entirely detached from the mind 
which created him. 

The poet seems never to have made an allusion 
to contemporary events, so that it is impossible 
to assign him to a definite age ; and his references \ . 
to rivers, moimtains, lands, and seas are so im- />(• < 
personal, so involved in the story he is telling, 
that it is as difScult to name his home as it is to 
define his time. 

Not only does he name no contemporary, 
person or event, but he, too, is unnamed in any\ 
contemporary source, so that practically every ', 
statement made regarding him is due to the i 
creative imagination of those who had little or 
nothing on which to buUd except inferences drawn 
from the poems themselves. It is a significant 
fact that different traditions in regard to Homer, 
his life and his work, become fuUer and more 
definite as they get farther away from any pos- 
sible sources of knowledge. My own belief is that 
Homer was bom in Smyrna, that he traveled much, , 
that the island of Chios was closely connected 
with his life, also t^aJ^heUyfidLat ap proximate] 



4 THE UNITY OF HOMER 

-900 B.c.y or about one hundred years after David 
composed his Songs, and Solomon his Proverbs. 
The greatest period of Hebrew literature there- 
fore would roughly correspond with the age of 
Homer. 

The name of Smyrna is not mentioned by 
Homer, but the indications that this was his 
native city are as follows : The language in which 
these poems were composed is the Early Ionic 
with very marked survivals of Aeolic f orms, a 
species of literary language which could hardly 
have responded to the thrill of creative genius 
except on the western shores of Asia Minor. The 
poet refers (B 535) to the men of Locris as living 
on the other side of Euboea, and since Locris is 
west of Euboea this must be viewed from the east. 
He speaks (B 145) of the waves being raised by 
the southwest winds or dashed by these same 
winds (B 395) against a jutting promontory, or 
of fogs forced landward by winds from the west 
(A 422), or of clouds driven on by Zephyrus 
moving over the deep (A 275), and of the mass 
of seaweeds washed ashore by gales from the 
north and west as these gales swept down from 
Thrace (15). In Homer the west wind, Zephyrus, 
is regularly a rough and disagreeable wind, while 
to most Greek and Latin writers it is the gentle 
and kindly breeze. Wood made the observation 
that only in the regions adjacent to Smyrna and 
along the Aegean coast of Asia Minor is the south- 
west wind a disagreeable one; while on the other 



HOMER AMONG THE ANCIENT GREEKS 5 

shores of the Mediterranean it is especially the 
balmy Zephyrus.' Vergil's Latin feeling for this 
breeze did not permit him to follow Homer in 
making Zephyms a rongh and disagreeable wind. 
All these references imply a knowledge of the 
eastern shores of the Mediterranean, and the 
mention of the star of autnmn (E 5) rising fresh 
from its bath in the ocean, and like references to 
the snn (H 422, T 1) would imply a view of the 
star or the snnrise such as the islands of the 
Aegean might supply. 

The verses which furnish the most definite 
indication of the poet 's nativity are those in which 
he describes the movements of the assembling 
hosts and the noises they make (B 459) : ^' Just 
as the many flocks of winged birds, cranes, or 
geese, or long-necked swans in a meadow of Asia, 
about the streams of the Cayster, fly here and 
there sporting on their pinions and alighting with 
loud cries, while the meadow reechoes." This 
description of the lighting of birds seems based 
on the impression this sight must have made on 
the youthful mind of the poet, and we may safely 
assume that Homer had watched with boyish 
delight these flocks of geese, cranes, and swans 
as they settled in the valley of the Cayster. The 
Cayster was but a few miles from Smyrna, near 
enough to be known to a boy of that city, but 
still not too near to dull the impressions by the 
familiarity of frequent observance. 

s Esmiy an the Original Geninu and WriUngs of Homer, London, 
1709. 



6 THE UNITY OF HOMER 

Every person who is familiar with the life of 
the ancient Greeks knows what a high value they 
put upon fish as f ood, so high indeed that the word 
for dainty is also the word for the meat of fish, 
S^p. The gourmand and the spendthrift were 
persons who wasted their substance in buying 
fish of fine quality; yet in Homer the heroes 
spumed fish and the two passages which describe 
the eating of that food add the pardoning phrase, 
"for they were on the verge of starvation." 
(S 369, M 332.) The reason for this aversion to 
fish in Homer is very simple, and is as follows: 
Sir William Bamsay in his book, Impressions of 
Turkey, gives a closing chapter which he calls 
''Tips to Archaeologists^" in which he describes 
upland trips from Smyrna. Sir William lays 
stress on the necessity of procuring proper food, 
especially meat, for such trips, and urges the 
traveler to rely on sardines to be taken along, or 
on kids and lambs to be obtained of the natives, 
but to avoid fish. His words in regard to fish are : 

Fish are rarely found and when found are usually 
bad; the natives have a prejudice against fish, and my 
own experience has been unfavorable. Fish of consider- 
able size swarm in the Tembris, but are flabby and taste 
like mud: two hungry archaeologists, after a mouthful 
or two of such a fish, could eat no more. In the clear, 
sparkling mountain stream that flows through the Taurus 
a small fish is caught; I had a most violent attack of 
sickness after eating some of them, and so had all who 
partook. 

An educated native of Smyrna has assured me 
that fish from nearby streams are regarded by 



HOMER AMONG THE ANCIENT GREEKS 7 

the natives with great disfavor and that this food 
is eaten only by the very poor. Evidently it was 
no accident that made Homer describe his heroes 
as abstaining from fish except under great com- 
pulsion, and we have in this a touch of local color 
and of local prejudice. It was because fish were 
in such disfavor as food in the neighborhood of 
Smyrna that the poet could not bring himself to 
serve them to his mighty warriors.^ 

All the lines by which Homeric poetry traveled 
to the outer world converged at the central and 
western coast of Asia Minor. Hence came the 
bards who recited Homer and hence originated 
the colonies, such as Sinope and Marseilles, which 
furnished manuscripts for the scholars of Alex- 
andria. Cynaethus, also, is said to have taken 
the knowledge of Homer from Chios to Sicily, and 
Lycurgus that same knowledge from Samos to 
Sparta. 

Finally, Smyrna is easily the preferred city 
in all the lives of Homer and among all the 
traditions of those who laid claim to his place of 
birth ; also the poet was called by a second name, 
Melesigenes, from the river Melas, near or in 
Smyrna. Whether he was thus called because he 
was regarded as the child of the river or from 
some festival held on its banks cannot now be 
determined. '^'^^. 

The language employed, the indications of the ^ 
poem, the radiation of the knowledge of the poetry t 

«''Hoxiiene Heroes and Fish/' CUutiodl Journal, XTL, 828. 




8 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

I from the west and central coast of Asia Minor, 
the antipathy to fish as f ood, the fair agreement 
of tradition, and the name Melesigenes, all unite 
in warranting the belief that the poetry of Homer 
originated in the neighborhood of Smyrna. The 
island of Chios, long a favored spot for the preser- 
vation of his poetry, was the home of a gaild of 
singers who called themselves the Homeridae. 
We do not know whether they claimed to be the 
descendants or the successors of Homer, but it is 
probable that they regarded themselves as pecu- 
liarly the defenders and interpreters of the poet 
whose name they had assumed. 

The earliest conjecture we have regarding 
the date of Homer is found in Herodotus (n, 53), 
where, in contrasting the great antiquity of Egypt 
with the recent civilization of Greece, the his- 
torian says that he would not assign to Homer 
an earlier date than four hundred years before 
his own time, and this opinion he has not derived 
from others, but it is his own conclusion. Since 
Herodotus flourished in the middle of the fifth 
century before Christ his estimate would put 
Homer in the middle of the ninth century, a time 
in Greek civilization which has left surprisingly 
few evidences on which to make a conjecture. 
How important the independent opinion of Hero- 
dotus is we may judge from the fact that even 
this estimate assigns Homer to an age as remote 
from his own as Columbus is from our times. 



HOMER AMONG THE ANCIENT GREEKS 9 

The matters in the poem on which to hase 
inferences in regard to the poet's date are ex- 
tremely slight. The Odyssey (u 89) describes the 
wrestlers as girding np their loins. But we know 
that wrestlers dispensed with the girdle at the 
fifteenth Olympiad; hence the presumption that 
this verse is older than 720. The poet in speaking 
of Phoenicia never mentions Tyre or the Tyrians, 
but only Sidon and the Sidonians. Sidon was 
completely overthrown in 677, leaving Tyre as the 
sole heir to the greatness of Phoenicia, so that in 
the use of the words Sidon and Sidonians we can 
say no more than that Homer was describing a 
condition which terminated in 677 e.g."* The fact 
that Lydia is called only by the older name 
Maeonia gives no clue to the date, for we do not 
know when the name was changed to Lydia. 
Even if we knew definitely it must be remembered 
that Homer is a poet and that he might have used 
the old name even after the new name had come 
into general use, just as Milton refers to Alex- 
ander as the Emathian conqueror at a time when 
Macedonia was universally known, and Emathia 
only a learned survival. On the other hand 
Homer speaks of the men who fought at Troy 
as belonging to a race greatly superior to those 
of his own day. But even here his references 
are so vague that many early and some late 
scholars would make Homer a contemporary with 
the events he describes. 

B ''Sidon and the Sidonians in Homer/' Class, Jour., XTV, 525. 



10 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

The discoveries made at Troy, Mycenae, and 
elsewhere suffice to show that Troy was destroyed 
during the twelfth century, so that Homer must 
be subsequent to that event. The Hiad and the 
Odyssey seem to have been known to Hesiod, 
who quoted them, changed or corrected them, but 
never mentioned their names or the name of their 
author. Hesiod can hardly be put later than the 
middle of the eighth century. Terpander is said 
to have won, about 675 b.c, a victory in a musical i 

contest in which he set to new music the words j 

i 

of Homer; and the Hiad and the Odyssey seem 
to furnish the background or the starting point 
for that mass of tradition which was put in verse 
during the early Olympiads. 

However much Homer may have influenced 
the poetry of the ages immediately succeeding his i 

own, it is a remarkable fact that no mention of j 

his name by any writer before the latter half of 
the sixth century has been preserved, and even 
that mention owes its preservation to writers 
living after Christ, who quoted it in their own ( 

works. The first known reference is found in a 
fragment of Xenophanes from Colophon, wh0 i 

censured Homer for the ignoble traits he assigned 
to the gods. The language used by Xenophanes 
argues for great antiquity of the poetry of Homer, 
especially the phrase: '^From the beginning, 
according to Homer, for all have learned from 
him.** This first preserved reference to Homer 
is hardly older than 550, while the Hiad and the 



HOMEB AMONG THE ANCIENT GREEKS 11 

Odyssey are first referred to by name in the writ- 
ings of Herodotus, or about one hundred years 
after Xenophanes. 

The night which surrounds Homer is thus 
both long and dark, but more wonderful than these 
silences is the fact that these two great poems 
have come down to us entire. No gaps are found 
in either, no incomplete lines, no half -preserved 
sentences. Not a single ancient writer has alluded 
to a single scene of the Iliad or the Odyssey which 
is not found in the present text of these poems, 
even if certain random verses have been pre- 
served which are not in the Vulgate. 

What the preservation of poems so ancient 
and so bulky signifies may be grasped by the fact 
that many early epics, such as the Thehais, the 
Cypria, the Little Iliad, the Destritction of Troy, 
the Nostoi, poems of the Epic Cycle, have been 
entirely lost, or preserved merely by chance 
quotations or references in late authors. The 
advanced critics of Homer, however, such as Ver- 
raU, Murray, and Wilamowitz, would draw no 
distinction between the Iliad, the Odyssey and 
these lost poems ; they assign them all to the same 
source. Verrall in an article published in the 
Quarterly Review for July, 1908 said: ** Homer, 
so-called, is a nebulous mass of old poetry reduced 
into distinct bodies, such as Iliad, Odyssey, 
Cypria, Aethiopis, Little Iliad, Nostoi, and so 
forth for educational purposes by learned Athen- 
ians, about 600-500 b.c.^' Murray in his Rise of 



12 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

the Greek Epic tries to prove that all the early 
epics were the slow growth of centuries, the 
work of numberless bards. On page 200 he says : 
''The truth is that all these poems or masses of 
tradition in verse form were growing up side by 
side for centuries/' Wilamowitz constantly 
argues that at the beginning of the fifth century 
all epic poetry was assigned to Homer, and even 
so clear a thinker as Andrew Lang agreed with 
that opinion, for in a lecture published in Anthro- 
pology and the Classics he said: ''To Homer 
early historic Greece attributed the great body of 
ancient epic poetry/' 

If these statements be true and early Greece 
did regard all this vast cycle as of common origin 
and of equal merit, then little remains to be said 
in regard to Homer, the man, the creator of the 
Hiad and the Odyssey, since so many and so bulky 
poems could never have originated with any one 
man, but must have been the work of guilds or 
schools cooperating through many ages. A dis- 
cussion of the assumed ancient belief that Homer 
was the author of all these poems deserves first \ 

consideration in any comprehensive treatment of 
the Homeric Question. 

There is not a writer before the death of 
Aristotle who quotes, naming the poem, a single 
verse from any of these poems, except the Iliad 
and the Odyssey, as the work of Homer; not one * 

who writes "As Homer said in the Thebais, the 
Cypria, or the Little Iliad. ^' Writers of the best 



I 






HOMER AMONG THE ANCIENT GREEKS 13 

period frequently quote the Iliad or the Odyssey 
with the introductory words **a8 Homer says in 
the Hiad/' or "as Homer says in the Odyssey," 
and the common method in early writers or gram- 
marians is to refer to the poems of the Epic Cycle 
thus : * * as the writer of the Cypria says, " or * * as 
the poet of the LiUle Iliad wrote," and so with 
all the Cycle; but I have never seen an early 
example of such indefinite phrases used concern- 
ing the Iliad and the Odyssey. As already stated, 
the regular form is "as Homer says in the Hiad," 
or " as Homer says in the Odyssey. * * The author- 
ship of these two poems is never referred to some 
indefinite poet or source. 

Every argument which is used to prove the 
Homeric authorship of the Cycle — ^and by the 
Cycle I mean the poetry connected with Thebes 
and Troy other than the Hiad and the Odyssey — 
and all th^ quotations are either from very late 
writers, or from the lost works of early writers, 
fragments accidentally preserved and out of their 
context, where the meaning is largely a matter 
of interpretation, conjecture, or emendation. AU 
these indirect references are to be treated with 
the greatest caution, and no unsupported quota- 
tion from any writer, however good or early that 
writer may be, is to be regarded as absolutely 
conclusive. 

Literary references by modem writers are 
often notoriously inaccurate; for example, in the 
America/n Magazine for January, 1920 a list of 



14 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

questions is asked, the ability to answer which is 
to be regarded as the mark of a broad education. 
One of these questions is, ^ ^ For what is Sheridan 
famous f On a later page the answer is given, 
* * Sheridan wrote * She Stoops to Conquer. * * * The 
man who wrote that question and answer was 
probably sitting in a room which contained the 
works both of Sheridan and of Goldsmith, yet if 
that same writer had lived two thousand years 
ago such a statement would be regarded as final 
proof. It is impossible to exaggerate the mass 
of false references in our modem journals, or 
the number of quotations falsely assigned to 
Shakespeare and the Bible. The scarcity and the 
expense of books in early ages must have made 
accurate quotation far more difficult then than 
now. Plutarch, Aelian, and Athenaeus, three of 
our chief sources for references to older writers, 
are woefully inexact, as any competent reader 
of these learned men knows; and Plato in two 
places quotes the same verse from Hesiod, but 
in different ways. He repeatedly gives parts of 
two verses as if they were a single verse, and he 
also has a jumbled form of perfectly good verses, 
while in the spurious Theages (125b) there is 
quoted as if from Euripides a verse which on 
excellent authority is assigned to Sophocles. 
Aristotle, the most learned man of antiquity, 
quotes the words of Odysseus (m 219) as the 
words of Calypso {Ethics ii, 9, 3) ; also he repeats 
the speech of Agamemnon (B 393) as if spoken 



HOMEB AMONG THE ANCIENT GREEKS 15 

by Hector {Ethics in, 11, 4), and in his Rhetoric 
(m, 9, p. 1409 b 8) he assigns a verse of Euripides 
to Sophocles. Aristophanes {Birds 575) substi- 
tutes Iris for Hera in quoting Iliad E 778, The 
scholia often assign verses to Homer which are in 
the extant works of other writers, e.g. the scholium 
to Pindar (0. xm, 12) credits Homer with a verse 
which is found in the poetry of Theognis, and 
another scholium to Pindar {N. vi, 91) quotes 
Homer as the source of a verse which is found in 
Hesiod. The outstanding importance of Homer 
made him a sort of universal source for all kinds 
of verses. This must never be forgotten in esti- 
mating the importance of various quotations. In 
view of these undoubted errors in primary and 
secondary sources we cannot accept quotations 
made by late and inaccurate writers as final 
evidence of authorship, unless that evidence is 
definite, unequivocal, and confirmed by reliable 
testimony. 

The inferences that Homer was early regarded 
as the author of the Epic Cycle are as follows: 
The ThebaiSy^ an assumed poem dealing with the 
Argive expedition against Thebes, is said by 
Wilamowitz, Finsler, and many others to be the 
first poem to be definitely assigned to Homer. 
This first reference to Homer was made by Cal- 
linus, an elegiac poet, who lived in Ephesus early 
in the seventh century before Christ. The source 
of this statement is a sentence in Pausanias ix, 9, 5. 

• "Homer aa the Poet of the Thehais," Clas9ieal BkUology, 
XVI, 20 ff. 



16 THE UNITY OF HOMER 

**The epic poem, the Thebais, was written in 
regard to this war, and Calaenus, when he speaks 
of this poem, said that he regarded the author as 
Homer. [It may also be translated, he regarded 
the anthor as an Homer.] Many others agree 
with Calaenns in this, but while I praise this poem 
I yet put it after the Hiad and the Odyssey.'* 
It seems that all that this passage is intended 
to show is the high estimate in which the Thehais 
was held and that even here the author of that 
poem is regarded as an equal with the great 
Homer. Not a manuscript has the word Callinus 
in this place, but all have Calaenus, so that Cal- 
linus is simply an emendation. The word Callinus 
is a pure conjecture; but even if all the manu- 
scripts had the form Callinus, it would be more 
than doubtful if the poet of Ephesus was intended, 
for that early poet was so little known that his 
name is not mentioned until Strabo, and when 
Strabo mentions the name he adds the phrase, 
**the poet of the elegy *' (xni, 604) ; and when he 
refers to him a little later he again adds the 
words **the poet of the elegy*' (xra, 627). The 
repetition of the phrase shows that the mere 
mention of his name could not be regarded as a 
sufficient indication of the person intended. 

Pausanias just a little earlier (vm, 25, 4) has 
said that the story of the expedition against 
Thebes had been put into verse by Antimachus, 
who was at the time of Pausanias one of the most 
popular of all the Greek poets, and Dio Cassius 



I 



HOMER AMONG THE ANCIENT GREEKS 17 

(lxix, 4) is the authority for the statement that 
Hadrian esteemed Antimachns and his Thehais 
more highly than the poetry of Homer. Kinkel 
gives fifty-six fragments from this Thehais of 
AntimachnSy while he has bnt seven from the 
earlier poem, most of which are doubtful. 

The earlier fragments are so f ew, while those 
from the poem by Antimachns are so many, that 
the mere mention of the name Thehais is almost 
certain to refer to the poem by Antimachns ; but 
here there can be no reasonable doubt, since 
Pausanias (vm, 25, 4) says he is referring to that 
poem. Hadrian put Antimachns ahead of Homer, 
Calaenus made hun the equal, and Pausanias, 
even if he appreciated the greatness of the 
Thehais of Antimachns, put him just behind 
Homer. Paley, in his Homeri Quae Nunc Extant 
etc., p. 39, argued that the Antimachns of the 
Thehais was really the poet of the Hiad and the 
Odyssey. There is nothing in Pausanias to show 
that he is not referring to Antimachns ; the read- 
ing is not Callinus, but Calaenus. And even if the 
reading were Callinus, there is nothing to connect 
him with the poet of Ephesus ; yet this is the sole 
evidence for the assertion that Homer was re- 
garded in the seventh century b.c. as the poet of 
the Thehais. 

The second writer quoted to prove that Homer 
was regarded as the author of the Thehais is 
Herodotus, from whom the following passage is 
cited: **The tyrant of Sicyon, Cleisthenes, when 



18 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

he was at war with Argos, banished the Homeric 
bards because the poetry of Homer so constantly 
praised Argos and the Argives.** (v, 67.) 

Grote, History of Greece, 11, 174, argued that 
it must have been the Thebais which so angered 
Cleisthenes, and Wilamowitz followed him by say- 
ing {H. U. 352) : **This can make sense here only 
if Homer is regarded as the poet of the Thebais.^ ^ 
Finsler accepts this as an established fact, saying 
in his Homer, I, 64 : * * The Thebais is meant, when 
the tjrrant, Cleisthenes, banished the bards from 
Sicyon, since the Homeric poetry gave too little 
honor to Argos.'' That is, they all assume that 
there is not enough praise of the Argives in the 
Iliad and the Odyssey to arouse either the pride 
of the men of Argos or the envy of their hostile 
neighbors ; hence they fly to an assumed Thebais, 
the contents of which are also assumed. The 
Argives or Argos are named in every book of the 
Iliad except book twenty, and, despite the fact that 
the Odyssey withdraws to Ithaca or to fairyland, 
they are named in fifteen books of that poem; 
hence they are named in thirty-eight books of 
our Homer. Hera is **Argive Hera," Helen is 
* * Argive Helen, ' ' and Agamemnon with his divine 
scepter ruled over "many isles and all Argos." 
Rawlinson, with no thought of this discussion, 
says in his note to the first chapter of his Herodo- 
tus: **The ancient superiority of Argos is indi- 
cated by the position of Agamenmon at the time 
of the Trojan War and by the use of Argive in 



i 



HOMER AMONG THE ANCIENT GREEKS 19 

Homer for Greek generally. No other name of 
a single people is used in the same generic way. ' ' 
Here this competent historian bases the claim 
for Argive superiority entirely on the campaign 
before Troy, that is, on the Iliad and the Odyssey. 
However, this is not a question of probabili- 
ties, for we know from the men of Argos them- 
selves the poetry which stirred their pride, since 
w. have /eopy^of the ,ery in»=riptiL they Bet 
up in honor of Homer. This inscription is added 
to the Contest between Homer and Hesiod as 
published in the works of Hesiod. The account 
of the inscription and the inscription itself is as 
follows : 

The leaders of Ar^os rejoicing greatly in the fact 
that their own i)eople have been so highly honored by 
the most illustrious of poets have in turn loaded him 
with conspicuous honors. They erected a bronze image 
and voted him a sacrifice for each day, each month, each 
year, and in addition every fifth year sent an offering 
for his glory to Chios. On his image they engraved the 
following verses: ''This is divine Homer, who adorned 
all proud Hellas with his wonderful poetic skill but most 
of all he honored the Argives, who humbled the god-built 
city Troy, as a requital for the wrongs done to the fair- 
haired Helen, and hence the proud-citied state worships 
him with divine honors." 

Thus we have from the Argives themselves the 
thing in Homer which they viewed with such 
boundless pride, and this was no exploit con- 
nected with Thebes : it was the expedition against 
Troy; that is, they felt exalted because Homer 
had honored them in the Hiad and the Odyssey 



20 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

Thebes is not mentioned in the inscription. There 
can be no doubt that hostile neighbors would envy 
them that very thing in which they themselves 
took such unbounded pride. The story of this 
expedition is found in no assumed Thehais, but 
in Homer, our Homer, the Homer of the Iliad and 
the Odyssey. 

Inasmuch as Thebes went over to the Persians 
it would seem natural for the Argives to stress 
their old conflicts at the time of the Persian War, 
but oddly enough the Argives never lay claim to 
honor or favor because of those early exploits. 
Yet the Athenians at the battle of Plataea claimed 
as one of the reasons for commanding the wing 
not held by the Spartans their own services at 
that time, and they said {Her. ix, 27) : **When the 
Argives led their troops with Polynices against 
Thebes and were slain and refused burial, it is 
our boast that we went out against the Cad- 
maeans, recovered the bodies and buried them at 
Eleusis in our own territory. * * In the face of this 
the critics assujne that there was nothing in the 
Iliad and the Odyssey to stir the pride of the 
Argives or to arouse the envy of jealous neigh- 
bors; accordingly they flee to a poem which told 
how these same Argives could not bury their own 
slain but depended on the mercies of a foreign 
race to bury them in a foreign soil. The love the 
people of Argos had for Homer is also shown by 
the fact that Aristarchus quoted readings from 
the Argive state manuscript of both the Iliad and 



HOMER AMONG THE ANCIENT GREEKS 21 

the Odyssey, but there is not the slightest evidence 
that they made any attempt to preserve a copy 
of the Thebais. 

The third proof offered for the Homeric 
authorship of the Thebais is founded on the Para- 
doxes of Antigonus of Carystus, chap. 25, in which 
a reference is made to the nature of the polyp. 
The quotation is introduced with the words, 
''As the poet has written in the much quoted 
verses.'' There is nothing to connect this either 
with Homer or the Thebais except the fact that 
the author is referred to by the phrase, "the 
poet,''o7roii7Ti}9, — ^a phrase often used of Homer. 
The reason that Homer more than anyone else 
is called the poet is simply because he is quoted 
more than any other. But he has no vested right 
in these words. Plato in the La^vs (901 a) refers 
to Hesiod with the unmodified words **the poet,'' 
oTTOiiyn;?, and we know that Hesiod is the one thus 
designated, since an extant poem of that author 
is quoted. There is not the slightest evidence that 
Antigonus had Homer in mind as the author of 
these verses. But the fact that Hesiod has been 
quoted only a few verses previously, and his well- 
known references to the polyp, make it probable 
that Hesiod was the author of this passage. 
These three references, one in Herodotus, one 
in Antigonus, and one in Pausanias, all based on 
unsupported and improbable conjectures, are the 
only evidence presented to show that the Greeks 
of the best period assigned the Thebais to Homer; 



22 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

yet if one reads Wilamowitz' latest book on 
Homer he is made to feel that Homer's earliest 
and greatest reputation is closely connected with 
this hypothetical Thebais. 

In the Panegyricus 158, Isocrates tells of the 
sadness the Greeks always feel when told of the 
wars between the Greeks. Then he adds: **I 
think that the poetry of Homer has received the 
greater glory because he pictures them as fighting 
foreigners, and it was just because of this that 
our ancestors honored him in musical festivals 
and in the education of the young/' Since the 
Argive expedition was a war between Greeks, this 
remark of Isocrates would have been absurd if 
Homer were regarded as the poet of the Thebais, 
or if there had been any such tradition. This 
speech of Isocrates was no random production 
but a piece of literary display on which he had 
spent long and careful labor, and is a far better 
criterion for the beliefs of his own and the preced- 
ing generation than the random remark, con- 
jectural remark at that, of writers coming several 
centuries later. Homer is definitely connected 
with the Thebais in the Contest between Homer 
and Hesiod, but, since this contains the name 
of the Emperor Hadrian, it must be regarded as 
a late production. 

The Cyclic poem from which there are pre- 
served the most verses is the Cypria, the poem 
which tells of the choice of Paris, the rape of 
Helen, and in general the events connected with 



HOMER AMONG THE ANCIENT GREEKS 23 

the Trojan War as far as the beginning of the 
Hiad. Most of the references assign this poem to 
Stasinus, or they leave the author unnamed and 
ambiguous, as **the one who created the Cypria/' 

6 ri> K^ihrpia ireirovqKm^ 6 r^ TLvirpia irotriaa^^ or ^Hhe 

poet of the Cypria/' o r&v Kxmpitov iroitiTtf;. The 
extant works of but two early writers, Herodotus 
and Plato, quote the Cypria. In Herodotus there 
is not even a quotation, only a loose paraphrase. 

Herodotus n, 117 contrasts the direct and easy 
voyage which took Helen to Troy as told in the 
Cypria with the circuitous journey described in 
the Iliad, and hence, he said, the Cypria could not 
be the work of Homer. This is the only direct 
reference in classical Greek to Homer as the poet 
of the Cypria, and this reference is a denial of 
that poem to Homer. / Wilamowitz jumps from 
this to the conclusion' that here is the first doubt 
cast on Homer *8 title to all the Cycle. He sees 
in Herodotus a Luther at the Diet of Worms, who 
dared defy the universal opinion of society, and 
accordingly draws the inference that up to that 
time no one had ever questioned the Homeric 
authorship of the entire mass of early epic poetry. 
He is referred to as the direct ancestor of Wolf; 
and just as Wolf dared assert that Homer was 
not the author of all the Hiad, so Herodotus dared 
proclaim that the Cycle was not all by Homer. 

The life of Herodotus was exactly contempo- 
rary with the rise of the Sophists. Protagoras, 
who was the first to give himself that name, was 



24 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

bom in a neighboring town within a few years of 
the birth of Herodotus. The Sophists prided 
themselves on their ability to prove either side of 
any question, and even Socrates was accused of 
taking the worse side and making it appear the 
better. We have, under the famous name of 
OorgiaSy an essay or speech illustrating how 
sophistic skiU can take the faults of Helen and 
make of them a garland of virtues ; and in the writ- 
ings of Antiphon we have a series of speeches in 
which it is shown how the same facts may be used 
as evidence for exactly opposite arguments. No 
doubt a common theme for these sophistic exer- 
cises would be the question of authorship of poems 
of doubtful or unknown origin. This would give 
abundant opportunity for paradoxical argfumen- 
tative skill. Herodotus may well be replying to 
an argfument of this sort by calling attention to 
something which had been overlooked. Becently 
a modem sophist has written a long treatise for 
the purpose of proving that the works of Shakes- 
peare were written by the Earl of Oxford, just 
as other earlier sophists tried to prove that they 
were written by Bacon. If a modem writer should 
call attention to some point or fact that made 
impossible either of these theories, would that be 
accepted as proof that this scholar stood alone in 
denying a common belief f In the age when the 
faith of all believed in a single Homer, Aristarchus 
made many comments in support of that belief. 
We know that these comments were directed 



HOMER AMONG THE ANCIENT GREEKS 25 

against the paradoxes of Xenon, and that it was 
not Aristarchus but Xenon who was attacking the 
conunon belief. We can assume that Herodotus 
took a like position and that he, as well as Aris* 
tarchusy supported the accepted beliefs against 
the sophistic vagaries. The passage in which 
Herodotus furnishes proof that the Cypria cannot 
be by Homer is the main support for the theory 
that Homer was regarded as the author of that 
poem. 

The Cypria is quoted by Plato in the 
Euthyphro 12 a in a manner which shows that 
he did not assign it to Homer, as the phrase 
o TTOiiTT^ hrolfia'€» 6 ironjaa^ is most vague and in- 
definite. Aelian is sometimes cited to prove that 
Pindar regarded Homer as the author of the 
Cypria. The passage in Aelian {Var. Hist, ix, 15) 
is as follows : 

The Argives assign to Homer the first place in poetry 
and regarded all others as second to him. They sacrifice 
to him, inviting Apollo and Homer. This also is said, 
that, being without resources to dower his daughter, he 
gave her as a present the Cypria. Pindar also agrees 
in this. 

teal 6/ioXoyei tovto TKvBapo^. To what does Pindar 
agree, the preeminence of Homer, or that he gave 
his daughter the Cypria as a dowry t It is very 
hard to decide, since we have no inkling of the 
context or of the thing which Pindar was intend- 
ing to say. Aelian in this passage is unusually 
obscure, and even when his meaning is perfectly 
definite he is so unreliable that we are rarely 



26 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

certain either of the matter or the person quoted. 
This applies to all his writings and most of all 
to his Varia Historia from which this quotation 
is taken, since it has been preserved only in ex- 
tracts and the original was culled from the works 
of men many of whom were as little to be trusted 
as Aelian himself. We seem to be forcing even 
this unreliable witness, when we quote him as 
saying that Pindar regarded Homer as the author 
of the Cypria. 

A late age which ignorantly referred all early 
poetry to Homer was forced to explain the fact 
that most of these poems were regarded as the 
works of other poets, and so took refuge in the 
assumption that, even if these poems were not 
credited to Homer, he had composed them and 
then waived his rights therein by presenting them 
to the poet who had married his daughter, or that 
he had bartered them for sustenance to the men 
under whose names they had circulated. These 
tales are no proof that Homer was regarded as 
the source of these various poems, but just the 
reverse; they show that they were regarded as 
the creations of the various poets whose names 
they bore. Thus was provided an easy explana- 
tion for the fact that the names of Arctinus, 
Stasinus, and the rest were attached to these 
poems, although all the early epics must have been 
the work of Homer. 

Perhaps the sentence most quoted to prove 
that Homer was regarded as the author of the 



. 



1 



/ 



HOMER AMONG THE ANCIENT OBEEES 27 

Epic Cycle is the oae in which Aeschylus is re- 
ported to have said that his own plays were but 
portions from the great Homeric banquet. Since 
very few of the plays of Aeschylus touch the 
traditions given in the Iliad and the Odyssey, the 
assumption has been generally made that a wider 
meaning must be given to the word Homer than 
merely the poet of these two poems. The passage 
is found in Athenaeus vm, 347 b : 

Ulpianus seems to eat nothing befitting a man, but 
to watch those eating to see if they overlook a bit of bone, 
of gristle, or of cartilage from the pieces served, not 
heeding the words of the noble and illustrious Aeschylus, 
who said that his own dramas were portions from 
Homer's great feasts. 

S9 ri^ avTOV rpaytjitBla^ re^XH ^^>^^ tk&>f€ r&v 'Ofii^pov 

fteydkmv hthnnov. Even those who interpret this as 
the statement of the poet that he took his plays 
from Homer find it difficult to explain how the 
Persians, the Prometheus Botmd, the Hiketides, 
could have thus originated. Those who try to 
render refidxn by crumbs or scraps miss the mean- 
ing entirely, for the word means portions or slices 
of fish, the choicest of Athenian foods (Phrynichus 
TTTT TO Si T^jua;^o9 fulpov inl IxOvo^)' Rutherford in 
a note to this defiinition gives a long list of quota- 
tions to show that this word denotes the best and 
most coveted of courses. The words in Athenaeus 
which immediately follow, "Aeschylus, even when 
defeated in a dramatic contest, proudly said that 
he left the decision to time, since he knew that he 
would receive his merited honors, ' ' show that the 



/ 



28 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

poet was not speaking in humility but in pride, 
and that he is not represented as comparing his 
tragedies to crumbs from the Homeric banquets, 
but to whole courses or portions which were left 
uneaten, or as the poet calls them refidxn. 

The meaning then is that some small-minded 
fellow sat searching for neglected scraps which 
the feasters rejected or overlooked, while 
Aeschylus was able to secure whole portions of 
the choicest viands from the banquet set before 
Homer. It was the good luck of Aeschylus that 
the Homeric banquet was so lavish that he was 
not reduced to crumbs but could feast on whole 
courses which the earlier poet did not use. If 
one will read the context in Athenaeus which just 
precedes and immediately follows the quotation 
from Aeschylus, he will see that the poet is not 
speaking in self -depreciation^ but exultation. No 
vgood Greek ever spoke with false humility of his 
own work — ^Uriah Heep was not a native of 
Attica. This interpretation makes impossible the 
presumption that Aeschylus regarded Homer as 
the poet of the entire Cycle. Pindar refers to 
Homer by name several times, each time a free 
adaptation of our present Homer, just the adap- 
tation needed to change the epic meter and 
dialect into the lyric strains and dialect of Pindar. 
Aristophanes in the extant plays refers to Homer 
or quotes him six times, either in an exact quota- 

7 The bearing of the boast of Aesehjlofl, that ''he left the 
decision in regard to his tragedies to the verdict of time," was 
pointed out to me by Professor Ivan M. Idnforth. 



I 



HOMER AMONQ THE ANCIENT OBEEES 29 

tion or in such a way as to show that he is 
referring to the Iliad and the Odyssey. In a frag- 
ment of the earliest play of this comic poet an 
old man questions a youth on the meaning of two 
obscure Homeric words, both of which are in our 
present text of Homer. 

Athenaeus (rv 172 e), says that in a poem of 
Simonides the following verses are used in regard 
to Meleager: ''Who surpassed all young men in 
the use of the spear, hurling it over the eddying 
Anaurus from lolcus, rich in vines. Thus Homer 
and Stesichorus sang to their people. ' ' This quo- 
tation is so indefinite, so out of all connection 
and context, that it is rash to hazard an interpre- 
tation. The meaning might be clear if the quota- 
tion were longer. We know that in the story of 
the ninth book of the Iliad, Phoenix tried to im- 
press Achilles with horror of the ruin wrought 
by the unyielding attitude of Meleager. This 
obstinacy of Meleager may be the thing to which 
reference is here made, but the fragment is too 
brief to give any indication of the use to which 
the tradition was applied. The fragment is purely 
negative and yields nothing on which to build 
theories of contents or of authorship. 

The last proof which I shall quote from 
classical writers that Homer was regarded as the 
poet of the Epic Cycle is furnished by the speech 
of Aeschines against Timarchus (128 flf.)> a speech 
delivered in 345 b.c, that is, after the death of 
both Xenophon and Plato and during the prime 



30 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

of Aristotle. In this speech the orator said that 
Homer, in the Iliad, before anything happened, 
often used the phrase ^'romor came to the army/* 
4>^fM7 8 ' €& trrparov fjKBe. These exact words are 
not found in the present Iliad. The assumption 
has therefore been made that Aeschines must have 
meant the lAttle Iliad; and since the contents of 
that poem are almost unknown it is easy to sup- 
pose that it had many examples of that phrase. 
Homer does not use the word 4^fiM in this phrase, 
but does have the exact synonym, the highly poetic 
i<r<ra^ in several passages, where the meaning is 
essentially the same as that given by Aeschines: 

B 93 : H'^ii hi a^iv 6<raa tAtfUtf 

irpvpova* Uvai^ Ai09 a77eXo9. 

CJ 413 : iaaa B* ap* £776X09 &ica marii tttoKiv 
&J(€TO irdvTQ, 

So also in a 282, fi 216. In all these sentences the 
mysterious i<raa is used in exactly the same sense 
as the 4^riM of Aeschines, and it is as unreasonable 
to look elsewhere for the origin of the phrase used 
by the orator as it would be to seek for some other 
source than Bishop Berkeley for the common 
quotation, ** Westward the star of empire takes 
its way,*' although he really said ** Westward the 
course of empire takes its way." Thus all the 
difference between Homer and Aeschines is that 
the orator substituted the prose 4>riM for the 
highly poetic Baaa. 

The evidence which I have presented is sub- 
stantially all that can be gleaned from all the 






HOMER AMONG THE ANCIENT GREEKS 31 

writers before the death of Aristotle to show that 
Homer was regarded until the middle of the fifth 
ceatnry as the poet of the great mass of early 
epic poetry. Not one dear and definite proof can 
be found ; each is weak, improbable, and dependent 
on forced interpretations or forced conjectures 
and emendations. 

The reasons for believing that the Greeks of 
the best period did not regard Homer as the 
author of the Trojan and Theban Cycle are 
definite and numerous : 

1. Not a single writer of the best period quotes 
a single verse as Homeric from the entire Cycle ; 
not one example of, for instance, ''Homer says in 
the Thebais/' ''Homer says in the Cypria'^; while 
hundreds of verses are quoted from the Iliad and 
the Odyssey as the words of Homer. 

2. A young man who is one of the speakers in 
Xenophon's Symposium (m, 5), the scene of which 
is laid at about 420 b.c, says : ' ' My father, eager 
to have me become a good man, compelled me to 
commit to memory all the poetry of Homer, and 
thus it happens that, even now, I can repeat from 
memory all the Iliad and the Odyssey. ' ' Here the 
words, "all the poetry of Homer,*' and "the Iliad 
and the Odyssey,*' are interchangeable terms. > 
Antisthenes replies to the young man that this is 
no great accomplishment, since all the rhapsodists 
know all these poems, too. Not a man in that 
group, not even the captious Socrates, suggested 
that in using the phrase, "all the poetry of 



32 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

Homer/' he must remember that other poems 
than the Hiad and the Odyssey have been assigned 
to Homer. Xenophon is the best possible author- 
ity. He is early, is acquainted with many lands, 
a man of the world as well as a man of letters. 
He gives us the unequivocal statement that in his 
time among educated Athenians Homeric poetry 
was regarded as coextensive with the Hiad and 
the Odyssey. 

3. An easy proof that the Greeks of the best 
period never regarded Homer as the author of 
the Cycle is found in the fact that Homer was 
to them the ideal of the best in poetry, to approach 
him was the highest praise any work of genius 
could receive, and the poetry of the Cycle was 
generally despised and neglected. A measure of 
the high esteem felt for the Iliad and the Odyssey 
and the low regard in which the Cycle was held 
is found in the fact that the Hiad and the Odyssey, 
despite their great lengfth, have come down to us 
entire, and, even if they had been lost, quotations 
therefrom and references thereto are so many and 
so full that we could reconstruct their general 
outline from the material thus furnished, while 
the poems of the Cycle are so utterly and com- 
pletely lost that we depend on a brief late prose 
summary for practically all our knowledge of 
them. Not a single line of some of them has 
been preserved, and Kinkel and Allen, in their 
full and exhaustive collection of the fragments, 
can not produce ten verses from all the Cycle 






HOMER AMONG THE ANCIENT GREEKS 33 

which are found in the works of writers who Uved 
before the death of Aristotle. It is a startling 
proof of the different regard in which the Iliadi 
the Odyssey, and the Epic Cycle were held that, 
according to Kenyon, in the fragments of known 
classical writers discovered in Egypt, far more 
than half of the total are from the Iliad and the 
Odyssey, while not a trace of the Cyclic poems 
has been found. Allen publishes one doubtful 
cyclic papyrus fragment. 

The reason for the neglect of these poems in 
Oreece and in Egypt is found in their small poetic 
merit and in their general lack of constructive 
ability. As proofs of this I shall furnish only 
five, but important, witnesses. Proclus, to whom 
we are indebted for most of our scanty knowledge 
of the Cycle, says, * * The poems of the Cycle were 
not preserved for their poetic merit, but because 
of the traditions and the mythology they con- 
tained." Horace, who, although a Boman poet, 
is earlier than much of the learned literature of 
the Greeks, says of Homer that he is the poet of 
perfect taste, qui nil molitur inepte, but he never- 
theless holds up to ridicule the creative futility 
of the Cyclic poets and contrasts that futility with 
the unerring judgment of Homer. Callimachus, 
the learned librarian of Alexandria, refers to 
Homer as the ** divine Homer'* {Ep. 61), but he 
also says **I hate the cyclic poem."' {Ep. 29.) 

sLudwich, De Cyelo Homerioo (Konigsberg, 1905), iraggests 
that CaUimadiiis may be referring here to an arrangement of 
words. Bach be appeared on the tomb of Midas, which is discussed 



34 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

Important as these witnesses are in regard to 
the comparative merits of the Iliad, the Odyssey, 
and the Cycle, they are as nothing, since we have 
the testimony of Aristotle, a man who had the 
literature before him and who had the ability to 
appreciate it. In all his writings on poetry 
Aristotle regarded Homer as quite alone, the per- 
fect example of taste, invention, and of execution. 
In his discussion of the unity of plot {Poetics vm) 
he says: '^ Homer evidently understood that point 
perfectly, whether by art or by instinct, in exactly 
the same way that he excels the rest in every 
respect." By **the rest*' he means the poets of 
the Epic Cyde, and again he says {Poetics xxm) : 
^ ' Here then the transcendent excellence of Homer 
is manifest. He never attempts to make the whole 
war of Troy the subject of his poem, although that 
war had a beginning, a middle, and an end. All 
other poets took a single period, a single hero, 
or a single action indeed, but with a multiplicity 
of parts. Thus did the author of the Cypria and 
of the Little Iliad.'' Similar ideas abound in the 
works of Aristotle, that the Iliad and the Odyssey 

in Plato's Phaedrus 264 D, and that he is not considering the 
Epie Cycle. The words of Proclus, ol ftiwroi y' d^x^i*^ <^<^ ^^^ 
KtficXoy dpa^povaiw c/t uMv, which are generally made the 
starting point for the assumption of H<Mneric authorship of the 
Qycle and are the first authority thus quoted by Ghrist-Schmid, 
are explained by Ludwich as having no sort of connection with 
the Epic Qycle, but simply referring to the word-play as giyen 
in the Phaednu, Just as Homer was regarded as the father of 
oratory and tragedy, so to him was referred the creation of this 
play on words. This interpretation removes much of the evidence 
for the theory that Homer was early credited with the authorship 
of the Epic Cycle. 



I 



HOMEB AMONG THE ANCIENT GREEKS 35 

show exactly the same high poetic skill, the same 
perfect control of plot, and in all these matters 
stand alone and apart from all the poems of 
the Epic Cycle. And in the Panathenaicus of 
Isocrates (xn, 263 ), an assmned speaker says of a 
certain group of literary productions that **They 
are as inferior to the work of Isocrates as those 
were inferior to Homer who attempted like themes 
with those put in verse by that great poet.'* 
From these primary proofs it is evident that 
the Hiad and the Odyssey were totally unlike all 
the other poems of the Cycle. Yet in the face of 
such conclusive evidence we are calmly assured 
that all these poems, the Hiad, the Odyssey, the 
Thehais, the Cypria, and all the Cycle were shnply 
parts of a like mass of poetry, all bearing the 
same marks and all assigned to the same poet, 
Homer. I am, however, unable to find any clear 
and conclusive evidence that a single writer be- 
fore the death of Aristotle assigned any poem 
of the Cycle to Homer, or to find any suspicion 
cast on the Homeric authorship of the Iliad and 
the Odyssey. 

It is worth the while to set over against every- 
thing that has been written on the Epic Cycle 
from Welcker to Wilamowitz these two sentences : 
**My father had me commit to memory all the 
poetry of Homer and I can now repeat by heart 
all the Hiad and the Odyssey," and '* Homer, 
admirable as he is in every other respect, is 
especially so in this, that he alone among the epic 



36 THE UNITY OP HOMBE 

poets is not unaware of the part to be played by 
the poet himself in the poem." (Xen. Sym. ui, 5, 
Aristotle Poetics xxiv.) These two passages do 
not need to be emended and they need no exegesis ; 
hence they give no proper sphere for imaginative 
^and creative scholarship. But they satisfy me 
and convince me that Homeric studies have no 
need to build on airy speculations when they have 
as a foundation such solid and unequivocal facts. 
The assumption of most critics has been that 
in the early literary ages of Greece Homer was 
a general name to which was assigned the entire 
mass of early epic poetry, and that slowly first 
one poem was taken from him and then another 
until all but the Iliad and the Odyssey had been 
denied him, when a period of credulity followed 
that lasted until Wolf took up the work which 
had so long lain dormant. Wolf then is a kindred 
spirit with the great literary leaders of the Age 
of Pericles. The exact reverse, however, is the 
true story, for not a single verse, not a single 
poem of the Epic Cycle was definitely quoted 
as the work of Homer until after the death of 
Aristotle. The few verses gathered by Allen 
under the heading Versus Heroici, which are 
assigned to Homer and yet are not in the Iliad 
or the Odyssey, are adaptations or misquota- 
tions of verses in the Vulgate. It caimot be too 
strongly emphasized that such quotations are to 
be treated with the very greatest caution, for even 
the best writers when they are exercising the 



HOMER AMONG THE ANCIENT GREEKS 37 

greatest care make serious mistakes. I wish to 
add two illustrations to those already given: 
When Macaulay wrote for the Edinburgh Review 
a review of Gleig's Warren Hastings he referred 
with great scorn to the literary inferiority of The 
Vicar of Wakefield, yet thought he had said The 
History of Greece. And he could never explain 
how he had written one thing when he believed 
he had written another. The most remarkable 
error of this sort with which I am familiar is 
Moore's quotation of Byron's Don Juan, IV, 4 as 
the words of Shakespeare, after he had already 
correctly quoted them in his own Life of Byron.^ 
The first poem to be clearly assigned to Homer 
by a reliable author, except the two great epics, 
is the Hymn to Apollo, which is quoted as Homeric 
by Thucydides (m, 104). The Margites, a lam- 
poon or literary caricature, was regarded as 
Homeric by Aristotle, who was probably voicing 
an inherited tradition, although the evidence that 
Archilochus and Aristophanes regarded this poem 
as Homeric is extremely weak. The first poems 
to be attached to the author of the Iliad and the 
Odyssey were these little poems of unknown 
origin, then others were assigned to that great 
name until, in the intellectual darkness which fol- 
lowed. Homer was regarded as the source of all 
early poetry. A comparison of the poems listed 
as Homeric by Xenophon, Plato, and Aristotle 
with those so given by Suidas will show which 

» Table Talk of Samuel Bogera, London, 1903, 223. 



38 THE UNITY OF HOMBE 

way the carrent was runnings and will clearly 
indicate whether poems were being taken from 
or added to the name of Homer. We cannot 
by taking the ignorant assertions of these late 
writers and by setting aside the explicit state- 
ments of the ablest thinkers of Alexandria and 
of Athens arrive at earlier truth. Suidas, Tzetzes, 
and Aelian are not such safe witnesses for Hellas 
of the fifth century as are Isocrates, Xenophon, 
PlatOy and Aristotle. 



CHAPTEEn 

THE AEGUMENTS OP WOLF 

With Aristotle the works of creative genius 
for the most part ceased, and the year of his 
death, 322 b.o., closed that long and brilliant era 
which is commonly known as Classical Greece. 
Not a trace of proof has ever been found that 
during the classical period anyone questioned the 
unity of the Hiad and the Odyssey or that they 
were both the work of one poet, and that poet, 
Homer. During the following years the Greeks 
lost their independence and by reason of their lack 
of political power and of the productive influence 
which that power called forth, they turned either 
to problems of scholarship or to the exercise of 
their great talents for subtle argumentation. 
One of these subtle exercises of the power to 
reason was the attempt to prove that the Hiad 
and the Odyssey were by different authors. They 
seem to have made no effort to find who these 
authors were, but to have been satisfied in pro- 
ducing arguments for diversity. Whether these 
arguments were meant seriously or were simply 
an attempt to apply to Homer that vaunted skill 
of proving either side of any question we do 
not know. But the greatest of the Alexandrian 



( 

1 



40 THE UNITY OF HOMEE 

scholars, Aristarchus, wrote replies which he 
named Answers to the paradox of Xenon, as if he 
regarded the so-called chorizontic argaments as 
merely sophistic attempts to prove the improb- 
able or the impossible. 

These argmnents seem to have been regarded 
solely as an exercise in argmnentation and they 
were without any known effect on the study of 
Homer. Seneca De Brev. Vitae 13, refers to that 
vice clinging to the Greeks of questioning, **How 
many men did Ulysses havef ** Which was 
written earlier, the Iliad or the Odyssey?'* "Did 
the same poet write both poems f Lucian, the 
leading Greek writer of the second century of our 
era, imagines that he had been admitted into the 
sacred presence of Homer, whom he questioned in 
regard to tljjie disputed facts of the poet's life and 
writings. Lucian learns from the poet himself 
his origin, and the reason for beginning his poem 
with the Wrath; learns that the verses rejected 
by the Alexandrians are genuine, and that the 
Iliad was written before the Odyssey, and from 
observation he saw that the poet had not been 
blind.* There is no reference in Lucian to any 
doubts cast on the authorship of the Iliad and the 
Odyssey. The author of the piece of literary criti- 
cism, De Sublimitate}^ JarmeTly auppQsedJto be 
gngnus, in an elaborate discussion of the char- 
acteristics of Homeric poetry gives no trace of 
any opinion which assigns the Iliad and the 
Odyssey to different authors. 

1 Lucian, Vera Historia n, 20. 




THE ARGUMENTS OP WOLF 41 

The entire lack of any following and also the 
fact that the separatist arguments were called 
paradoxes by Aristarchns and referred to by 
Seneca as an example of that Greek perversity 
in seeking absurd themes for argoing, as well as 
the silences of Lucian and Longinns, convince me v 
that the so-called chorizontic movement of the 
early Alexandrian period was simply a piece 
of argumentation, an exercise in dialectics, and 
had nothing in common with literary criticism. 
Except for this utterly vain and ineffectual para- 
doxical reasoning of Xenon and Hellanicus we 
hear of no arguments advanced by either Greek 
or Latin writers to show that Homer was not the 
creator of both the Iliad and the Odyssey. 

Others may have anticipated him in many or 
in all of his theories, but the Homeric Question 
was definitely and scientifically launched by Fried- 
rich August Wolf in his famous Prolegomena, 
Volumen I, published in 1795, the influence of 
which has permeated all fields of classical and i 

Biblical literature. Two circumstances have con- 
tributed to the great importance of this work of 
Wolf: first, it came at a time when the French 
Revolution had filled the earth with general 
skepticism and with distrust in inherited beliefs 
and existing institutions. Everything went into 
the caldron of doubt. The leaders in this move- 
ment, with its glorification of the common man, 
the mass, felt called upon to challenge the claims 
of genius and to assert that what had been 



42 THE UNITY OF HOMER 

regarded as the work of the superman was, in fact, 
the production of the people, the fruit of whose 
achievements had been wrested from them. The 
Iliad and the Odyssey were but folk-poetry, the 
poetic expression of the entire people, and not 
the creation of any single superior genius. Marx, 
under the same spell, later argued that all wealth 
is produced by labor, by the common man, and 
that a few have taken to themselves or exploited 
the work of the jnany; so in a somewhat similar 
way it was assumed that epic poetry was the pro- 
duction of the entire people and that a real or 
hypothetical Homer had exploited the people of 
its poetry. 

The second reason contributing to the enor- 
mous popularity of the Homeric Question lies in 
the fact that for about a century and a quarter 
certain types of universities and certain types of 
scholarship have dominated the learning of the 
world. In these universities promotions have 
generally been in exact ratio to the number of 
pages of articles, pamphlets, or books published. 
It has almost been an actionable offense to say of 
a professor, **He is an inspiring teacher,'* which 
would be like saying of a woman, ^^She has a good 
heart" or **She means well.'' The real praise 
is to say of him, * * He is a productive scholar, ' ' a 
** productive scholar" being one who publishes a 
certain number of pages per year, pages which 
are always counted and are rarely weighed. The 
Homeric Question f urnishedinexhausliBI? mater- 



\ 



w 



^ 



THE AEQUMENTS OF WOLF 43 

ial for numberless pages ; you did not need to read 
what others had written, since you could always 
create a new theory of your own. You did not 
even need to read Homer. All you needed was 
paper, ink, and audacity. Here anyone could be 
a millionaire and required no capital to start in 
business. The field was unlimited, you could 
either discuss what Homer had said, or, if you 
did not care to read Homer, you could write a 
book on what he should have said. Wilamowitz, 
the most radical of critics, practically throws 
away all the present Iliad and reconstructs a new 
Hiad, **an Hiad worthy of a great poet.*' The 
immense popularity of the Homeric Question has 
largely consisted in the fact that it put no re- 
straint on imaginative or creative and productive 
scholarship. It did not demand as a prerequisite 
a knowledge of the thing discussed, for one could 
always escape the charge of ignorance of Homer 
by pointing out that the verses quoted against 
him had been rejected by a whole set of critics. 
As every verse in Homer has been pronounced 
late by some high authority, the answer was 
always ready and always complete. If the ques- 
tion of Homeric authorship were as settled as 
that of Sophocles or Milton, then a real knowledge 
of the subject must precede all articles or books 
on Homer and the field would thus be immeasur- 
ably reduced. 

The main argument advanced by Wolf for 
doubting the unity of the Iliad rested on the 



44 THE UNITY OF HOMER 

; assumption that writing was unknown at the time 
the Iliad originated, or so little known that it 
could not be used for Uterary purposes, and with- 
out writing Wolf regarded it as impossible that 
a poem of suoh bulk as the Iliad should either 
have been composed or preserved. He argued 
also that even if poems of the size of the Hiad 
and the Odyssey had been composed there would 
have been no occasion for their delivery, since no 
audience could have been found willing or capable 
of listening to poems of suoh magnitude. He 
assumed that the Iliad must have been composed 
of a mass of songs, more or less independent, 
songs undergoing constant alterations until they 
were collected into one poem under the orders of 
Peisistratus, who appointed a commission for that 
purpose. Homer by this process was eliminated 
and, whoever may have composed the different 
songs, the Hiad itself is a learned creation 
mechanically put together about the middle of 
the sixth century b.g. That great argument of 
Wolf in regard to writing, around which the 
Homeric Question so long revolved, has now been 
abandoned, so that it is hardly worth the effort 
to storm a position which has long been deserted 
and which no one today would care to defend. 

The second argument was that, even if such 
poems had been composed, their bulk would be so 
great that they could not be recited, and also there 
could have been no occasion for their delivery. 
It was not necessary that either poem be repeated 



THE ARGUMENTS OF WOLF 45 

entire at one time. It must be remembered that 
many of our best literary productions appeared 
in serial form in magazines having only monthly 
or quarterly issues. It is quite as easy to suppose 
that an audience could receive the Iliad in install- 
ments as it could a Sartor Res(irttis or a Vanity 
Fair. We must not forget, however, that there is 
one great difference between an ancient and a 
modem audience and that is the immense diver- 
sity of the claims on the modem reader in com- 
parison with the ancient hearer. We know that 
the Greeks would assemble from dawn to dark 
for several consecutive days in order that they 
might listen with rapture to the productions of 
a dramatic festival. It is very doubtful if this 
long Uterary festival of the drama was a complete 
innovation. The conservative Greek may well 
have followed, in listening to Aeschylus, Sopho- 
cles, and the other dramatic poets, the same habit 
which had for ages made him familiar with 
literary recitals covering several days. During 
the last three days of the City Dionysia in Athens 
nine tragedies, three satyric plays, and at least 
three comedies were presented, or not less than 
fifteen dramas, hence at least five on each day. 
Some of the existing dramas contain over seven- 
teen hundred verses, but the average is not far 
from fourteen hundred. Each day, therefore, 
would see about seven thousand verses presented 
by actor or chorus. In all the plays the move- 
ments of the chorus, the pauses in action, and 



46 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

the dramatic silences no donbt so prolonged 
the time of delivery that these seven thousand 
dramatic verses must have occupied as much time 
as would be taken by ten thousand epic verses, 
recited by single bards. It is therefore clear that 
the last three days of the City Dionysia involved 
quite as much strain on the hearer as did the 
recital of the entire Iliad and Odyssey. But the 
last three days of the City Dionysia followed 
another day or days just as strenuous, since the 
dramas came after the audience had already 
listened to ten dithyrambic choruses.* Even Greek 
tragedy had no sudi grasp on the Greek mind 
and Greek enthusiasm as that held by Homer, so 
that it is far easier to picture them listening to 
the entire Hiad and Odyssey than to fifteen or 
more dramas in three consecutive days. The 
assumption, then, that there was no occasion on 
which the Iliad and the Odyssey could have been 
presented collapses under the consideration of the 
undoubted facts of Greek dramatic production. 
I The final argument was that these poems took 
;on their epic form in Athens under the leadership 
of Peisistratus, hence the theory that under this 
despot not only were the detached poems of 
Homer united into epic wholes, but changes were 
made in the text to glorify Athens and Peisis- 
tratus himself. These will be discussed in reverse 
order, first, the probability that interpolations 
were made in the interest of Athens, and, second, 

1 Flickinger, The Oreek Theater and Its Drama, 196 ff. 



THE AEQUMENTS OP WOLF 47 

the part taken by Athens and Peisistratus in the 
creation or preservation of the Iliad and the 
Odyssey. 

The first writer to refer to interpolations in 
the interest of Athens is Diogenes Laertius, a 
writer presumably of the second century of our 
era, who in his Life of Solon, chap. 48, says : * * It 
is reported that Solon wrote in the Catalogue 
the verse which makes Ajax draw up his ships 
next to the Athenians. ' ' In chapter 57 this same 
Diogenes Laertius gives Dieuchidas, a writer of 
Megara, as the source for this statement. Tradi- 
tion varies between Solon and Peisistratus as the 
forger of that verse, but the theory of Athenian 
interpolation is not supported by any good early 
literary or historical authority. It rests chiefly 
on the evidence furnished by the poems them- 
selves. We have all the facts a Megarian or a 
Diogenes Laertius had and we can test for our- 
selves the probability of interpolations in the 
interest of Athens. 

Attica and Athens must have existed long 
before Homer. Excavations show that in the 
vicinity of Athens was an important center of 
Mycenaean culture, so that any poem dealing in 
a large way with a general expedition undertaken 
by the Greeks of that age must assign a part, 
presumably a large part, to Athens. 

How prominent in Homer are the warriors 
from this Mycenaean center? In the first book 
of the niad the poet introduces Achilles, Aga- 



I 



48 THE UNITY OF HOMER 

memnon, Ajax, Idomenens, Menelaas, Nestor, 
Odysseus, and Patroclns; and Diomede appears 
early in the second book. It is not until the 
Catalogue of the Ships that a single Athenian is 
named, and then only in a sort of geographical 
survey, where the poet, having described the 
forces from Boeotia and the intervening or adjoin- 
ing regions, passes to Athens and to Salamis, then 
on to Argos and to Tiryns. The bitterest enemy 
of Athens could hardly have omitted Attica in 
this general survey. Athens is there represented 
by a single leader, Menestheus, a leader in whom 
the Athenians took no pride, so little pride indeed 
that Euripides, when telling the story, despite 
Homer, substituted another leader, whose memory 
would arouse the interest and the enthusiasm of 
his own countrymen.* 

This Menestheus next appears in A 338, when 
Agamemnon sternly rebukes him for his listless 
inactivity in a time of danger, while Menestheus 
in silence listens to the reproof. His next appear- 
ance is at M 331, when, terrified by the approach 
of the Lycian leaders, he sends for the help of 
Ajax, who comes and rescues him. It seems odd 
that the Athenians, who are assumed to have laid 
claim to the island of Salamis because of their 
relations' with Ajax, should have either interpo- 
lated or preserved these verses in which their own 
timid champion was rescued by the leader of the 
very island over which they claimed control. Why 

s IpK in Avli8, 247. 



THE ARGUMENTS OF WOLF 49 

did they not reverse it, and have Ajax rescued by 
Menestheusf They conld then support their own 
claim by an epic obligation. In N 685 is pictured 
the failure of Menestheus and his men to keep 
Hector from the ships, and in O 329 Menestheus 
is utterly unable to save Stichius, an Athenian, 
from Hector, and lasus, also an Athenian, from 
Aeneas. Menestheus is not mentioned again in 
Homer, not even reappearing at the final review 
of the Greeks to take part in the games held 
in honor of Patroclus. These three generals, 
Stichius, lasus, and Menestheus, are the sole 
representatives of Athens named in Homer, the 
first two being introduced only to be slain, and 
having no voice nor part in the poem. Menes- 
theus, the Athenian leader, is never consulted, is 
spoken to but once, and then in severest rebuke, 
speaks but a single time and that in a plea for 
help, sees his companions fall at his side, helpless 
to save them, does no act of valor, however slight, 
and passes from notice early in the course of 
the poem. If such a hero was created to exalt 
Athenian pride, then that pride was easily exalted 
and easily satisfied. 

The verses selected as proof of forgery in the 
interest of Athens are B 557 f., **Ajax brought 
twelve ships from Salamis and bringiug them \ 
moored them where the hosts of the Athenians 
stood. '^ The second verse is referred to as if 
genuine by Aristotle {Rhet. i, 15), but Megarian 
sources claimed it was a forgery inserted to 



\ 



50 THE UNITY OP HOMBE 

decide or strengthen the daims of the Athenians 
to the island of Salamis in their contest with 
Megara. Zenodotus and Aristarchus appear to 
have passed in silence the charge of Athenian 
interpolation, even though they did not admit 
this verse into their text. 

Homer consistently keeps Ajaz near the 
Athenians ; Menestheus and his men were rescued 
by Ajax from the Lycians in M 339 flf. In the 
fierce fight between Hector and Ajax (N 185 flf.)> 
Amphimachus is slain, and his body is rescued and 
carried back to the line of the Achaeans by two ' 

Athenians, Menestheus and Stichius. These same I 

Athenians (N 865 flf.) try in vain to restrain Hec- ' 

tor in his attack on Ajax. In the great struggle 
between Ajax and Hector (O 329 flf.), Stichius and 
lasus, the two Athenian companions of Menes- j 

theus, are slain. Once only is Menestheus appar- ^ 

ently away from Ajax, and that is in the review 
of the army made by the king in A, where Agamem- 
non upbraids him and Odysseus, but soon after 
(A 489) Antiphus hurls at Ajax, misses him, and 
hits a companion of Odysseus; now Menestheus 
and Odysseus entered the fight as companions, 
hence even here Ajax was fighting near the 
Athenians, and Ajax, Odysseus, and Menestheus 
must have stood close together. 

This hidden proof of the intimate relations 
existing between Ajax and the Athenians can not 
be due to an interpolator, but must come from 
the original poet. This subtle harmony is not 



I 

4 



THE ARGUMENTS OF WOLF 51 

an addition, it is the hidden harmony of the 
whole. The poet who wrote the suspected line t 
had the «une idea whenever he referred to Ajax » 
and the Athenians. \ 

This suspected verse is the only one in the 
niad which gives a home to Ajax, and it seems 
most unlikely that this mighty chieftain, second 
only to Achilles, should be a warrior without a 
home and without a country. It has long been 
observed that most of the Homeric heroes moved 
to and from the battle in a chariot, but sweating 
Ajax, loaded wit^ his ponderous shield, moved 
always on foot and had neither a driver nor a 
chariot. This trait he shared with Odysseus, who 
came from the little island of Ithaca, and it is fair 
evidence that he, too, came from sonie island ; 
too small to train its inhabitants in the use of "^1 
the chariot. This small island is named in the ^ 
suspected verse and in none other in the Iliad. 
Inasmuch as Ajax is homeless without this verse, 
since the absence of a chariot marks him as an 
islander, since he is regularly near the Athenians, 
and since Aristotle refers without questioning to 
this verse as Homeric, I regard it as genuine and 
as a part of the original conception of the Iliad... _. 

The references to Athens in the Odyssey are-; 
few and vague, never joined to any praise of that 
city : once Sunium is named as the promontory of 
Athens ; once Odysseus tells how he saw Ariadne/ 
whom Artemis slew as she was going from Crete/ 
to Athens; once it is said that Orestes returned 



52 THB UNITT OP HOMES 



I 



from Athens to slay the murderer of his father; 
and onoe it is said that Athena came to Marathon 
and Athens of wide streets. These are all the 
direct references to Athens in the Odyssey. But 
two of them are highly significant, for the simple 
statement that '^Orestes returned from Athens" ] 

is at complete variance with Athenian tradition, 
since it was one of the commonplaces of the Attic 
traditions that Orestes came from Phocis. If 
tAthenian pride inserted Athens here in Homer, 
fwhy did that same pride retain Phocis in tragedy? 
If Athens ever controlled Homeric tradition, why 
was the word Athens not changed to Phocis f | 

The answer seems simple : The word was in Homer ' 

in spite of Athenian traditions, and no one in 
Athens had power to change it. The other sig- 
nificant passage is y\ 80, where it is said that \ 
'^ Athena left Scheria and came to Marathon and ^ 
to Athens." This has been regarded as the sure ; 
proof of tampering with the text of Homer, and 
Seeck, who sees many defects on many pages of 
Homer, says : ' ' That the goddess should have come 
from Phaeacia, that is from the west, and pass over 
the east coast of Attica before coming to Athens is 
highly unreasonable. If the poet in spite of this ij 
names Marathon, it could only be from personal 
grounds. In all probability Marathon was his f 
home."* The last sentence he puts in italics. I 
That is to say, the poem contains a serious 
blunder in the matter of the geography of Athens, 

4 Seeck, Quellen der Od., 335. 



THE ARGUMENTS OF WOLF 53 

a blunder self-evident to any Athenian, hence the ' 
passage must have been due to an inhabitant of 
Attica, an inhabitant who knew better, so that 
he might delight his own fellow-countrymen, who 
also knew better. This very inaccuracy shows ; 
that the verses were composed by a poet with only 
a vag^e idea of the relative positions of Athens 
and Marathon, composed also for an audience 
with the same indefinite ideas. Homer had no 
maps or charts before him and would be expected 
to have this indefinite grasp of direction in regard 
to lands somewhat remote. This vagueness is of 
a piece with the belief of Nestor that birds of 
passage could not cross the Mediterranean in a 
single year (y 321) or the statement of Menelaus 
that Pharos is a long day's sail from the mouth 
of the Nile {i 355). Also, in general connection 
with the influence of Athens on Homeric poetry, 
the fact must not be forgotten that the word \ 
Athens is found in but a single passage in the \ 
niad and that in the general geographical survey \' 
of the Catalogue. 

It has been a common presumption of the 
critics that the men who collected or created the 
Hiad and the Odyssey for Peisistratus added to 
the Odyssey a son of Nestor, whom they named 
Peisistratus in order to flatter the tyrant. This 
youthful Peisistratus is one of the least important 
actors of the poem. He was created to accompany 
Telemachus to Sparta, and when that is done he is 
completely ignored. After he and Telemachus 



t 

I 

I 



54 THE UNITY OF HOMER 

part company (o 215), he is forgotten, even his « 

companion does not bid him any farewells^ for 
he simply leaves him. The poet makes no men- 
tion of his reception by his father, and he does 
not allow him to tell the story of the trip to 
Sparta. The significant fact, however, is that 
when Telemachus narrates to his mother the tale 
of that journey he never mentions Peisistratus 
nor refers to him in any way ; clear proof that he 
was a person in whom the poet and the hearer had 
only a secondary interest. Such a character is 
the creation of the original poet and has no marks 
of the flatterer, for there is nothing in it to flatter 
anyone, certainly not the tyrant of Athens. 

The positive proofs that the Homeric poems 
were never under Attic control are many. In 
Homer Oedipus died in Thebes QV 679), although 
one of the greatest plays of Sophocles is founded 
on the story of his death in Colonus, a suburb of 
Athens; Tydeus was buried in Thebes (H 114), 
yet the Athenians prided themselves on his burial 
at Eleusis; Philomela is the daughter of Pan- 
dareus (t 518), not of the Athenian Pandion; 
Hecuba is the daughter of Dymas (11 718), but 
in Attic traditions she was the daughter of 
Cisseus ; Orestes returns to his home from Athens | 

(y 307), not from Phocis; Agamemnon's daugh- ( 

ters have names utterly unlike the names given [ 

them by the Athenians (I 145). How easily an 
Athenian could have substituted the Attic Iphi- 
geneia for the Homeric Iphianassal The hero 



N 



THE ARGUMENTS OF WOLF 55 

of the Odyssey reappears as the villain of Attic 
tragedy ; the kindly, gentle host and friend, Mene- 
laus, becomes almost inhuman; and Minos^he 
Cretan tyrant, who demanded the annual sacrifice 
of fourteen Athenian youths to the Minotaur, is, in 
Homer, the wise judge, the friend and companion 
of Zeus. It is beyond belief that the Athenians 
ever had such control of these poems as to insert 
Peisistratus into the story of the Odyssey and to 
reshape them at will, yet never took the pains to 
rewrite these traditions which could have been 
so easily changed. To see how an Athenian who 
really had a free hand dealt with Homeric tradi- 
tions, we need only turn to Euripides, who, in his 
Iphigeneia in Aulis, substituted another leader 
for Homer's Menestheus and, in spite of the 
definite number of fifty ships named in the Cata- 
logue, increased the Athenian contingent to sixty, 
while Argos is made inferior by reducing its ships 
from eighty to fifty. The internal evidence fur- 
nishes no proof that any changes were made in 
the text of Homer in the interest of Athens. 
Moreover, if Athens had absolute control of these 
poems, the failure to bring them into harmony 
with Athenian pride and Athenian traditions is 
one of the most inexplicable things in literature. 
What external proofs are there that Athens 
or Peisistratus ever controlled this poetry! The 
story of Peisistratus and Homer seems to have 
originated in the hostile state of Megara, where 
political enmity sought to console itself by claim- 



I 



I 



56 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

ing it had lost by fraud what it could not gain 

by force. No admirer of Peisistratus has been 

able to show that any intellectual life was called 

into being by him or by his sons. It is true that 

Onomacritus was detected in forging a prophecy 

for these superstitious despots, and Herodotus 

tells of their great interest in signs, omens, and 

oracles, but neither he nor any early writer gives 

the slightest indication that any creative intellect- I 

ual or literary impulse came from that family. 

The Peisistratidae might have had the wealth to 

employ and the taste to appreciate the praises 

or the songs of an Anacreon or a Simonides, but 

 

I the literary barrenness of Athens during their 

i lives and during the years immediately following 

; gives no indication that they furnished any stim- 

'• ulus to literary activity. The story that Peisis- 

; tratus founded a great library and was the patron 

I of letters seems pure fiction, for Aristotle in his 

I recently discovered Athenian Constiiidion, chap. 

; 16, describes in great detail the work done by 

«\:P^rsistratus, his criminal laws, and the fact that 

' he recognized therein extenuating circumstances, 

; his efforts to assist the poor farmers, and also 

/ his democratic and philanthropic spirit, but he 

j makes no reference to his library or to his literary 

j pursuits. When we consider Aristotle's inunense 

enthusiasm for literature and for the gathering 

of books, we are certain that he would never 

have passed over in silence the great intellectual 

achievements which the advocates of Peisistratus 



n 



THE ARGUMENTS OF WOLF 57 

as the creator of Homer so confidently assume. 
No writer, whose works have surviveci connects 
Peisistratus with Homer until Cicero, and Cicero 
lived almost five hundred years after the time of 
Peisistratus. No later writer adds any detail 
which proves a new source of knowledge, hence 
the multiplication of the names of later writers 
referring to Peisistratus adds no strength to the 
argument. 

There is not to be found in Herodotus, Plato, 
Aristotle, nor in any early Athenian writer a ref- 
erence connecting the tyrant with Homer, nor is 
there a single allusion in all the great mass of 
learning referred to the scholars of Alexandria? 
Wolf's statement that the united voice of all an- 
tiquity consistently assigned to Peisistratus the 
honor of collecting, arranging, and putting into^ 
writing the poetry of Homer looks dangerously 
near intentional deception. Even more to the 
point is the fact that Herodotus says the Athen- 
ians used that passage in the Catalogue, which is ' 
now most suspected, to explain their unwillingness j 

 

to yield the command of the fleet, at the time of i 
the invasion of Xerxes, to any but Sparta, and he i 
makes no comment. No one familiar with the ! 
method of Herodotus could suppose that he knew \ 
the Athenians were using a forged passage and 
yet concealed that knowledge. Again, when he de- 
scribed Onomacritus as one who had been exiled 
for interpolating a verse into the poetry of 
Musaeus, there can be no reasonable doubt that 



58 THE UNITY OF HOMER 

he would have added that formerly this Onoma- 
critus had been intrusted by Peisistratus with the 
task of collecting the poetry of Homer and he had 
also added verses thereto. It is incredible that 
a public sentiment which exiled a man for inter- 
polating a verse in so insignificant a poem as that 



1 



I of Musaeus should have been indifferent to whole- 
l sale additions to the almost sacred poetry of 
 Homer. 

In regard to the Megarian charge that the 

Spartan arbitrators were tricked in awarding 

. Salamis to Athens because of an interpolated 

1 verse, one of two things is true : either the poetry 

. I of Homer was well-known at that time or it was 

j I not. If well-known, an interpolation would have 

J 1 been inunediately detected ; and if it was not well- 

\ known, it would not have been accepted as the 

!■ vultimate authority. In all the attacks made later 

) \)n Athenian duplicity, no Spartan ever complains 

; 6f this deception, and no Athenian is ever quoted 

as defending a proposed injustice by referring 

to this clever imposture of the fathers. 

There is no evidence for this Homeric recen- 
sion under the supervision of Peisistratus but the 
evidence of probabilities. 'What are the probabili- 
ties that in the second half of the sixth century 
Homer came so completely under the control of 
Athens that in a few years Athenian legates at 
Syracuse could quote Athenian interpolations as 
genuine and neither the speakers betray nor the 
hearers suspect that the quoted verses were 



THE ARGUMENTS OF WOLF 59 

spnrionsfj In order to compel this complete and 
rapid acceptance the Athenians must have had a 
unique and commanding position both in govern- 
ment and in literature, so that all Hellas would 
without questioning regard them as leaders. But 
just the opposite is true, for in the years immedi- 
ately following the fall of the family of Peisistra- 
tuSy Athens was unable to settle her own domestic 
affairs without the help or intervention of Sparta, 
and in 480, ten years after Marathon, Athens 
accepted her own inferiority as an established 
fact and yielded to Sparta the right to command 
both the naval and land forces in the struggle with 
Xerxes. Weak as Athens was in a military and 
political sense in the years before the Persian 
Wars, her Uterary fame was even more feeble. 
It is hard for us, with the glory of the fifth and 
fourth centuries in our minds, to grasp how far 
Athens lay outside the currents of literature until 
the rise of the drama. The Muses were connected 
with Helicon, Olympia, and Pieria, but there was 
no mount of the Muses in Attica. Such early 
fabled bards as Linus, Thamyris, and Musaeus 
were from other parts of Greece. No poem of the 
Epic Cycle was ever assigned to an Attic poet and 
we are told that Hesiod of Boeotia, Peisander of 
Bhodes, Panyasis of Samos or of Halicamassus, 
and Antimachus of Colophon were regarded as the 
greatest epic poets after Homer. No Athenian in 
that list 1 Peisistratus lived in the age of the lyric 
poets, yet not one of all the illustrious nine lyric 



60 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

poets was bom in Athens. What district adjacent 
to the Aegean Sea was so destitute of literary fame 
as Attica in 500 b.g. f If poetry was to be recited 
at the great f estivals^ the Athenians were obliged 
to adopt the works of a foreign poet, who sang the 
praises of rival nations^ and if a living poet was 
desired^ it was necessary to send abroad for an 
Anacreon or a Simonides. It conld not have been 
either the political or literary position of Athens 
which compelled an early acceptance of an Attic 
version of Homer. Schools of Homeric enthusi- 
asts flourished before the time of Peisistratus in 
many cities of Ionia and in the islands of the 
Aegean, from which a knowledge of Homer radi- 
ated to all parts of the Greek world. We have a 
long list of the names of those who busied them- 
selves with investigations in regard to Homer 
and Homeric poetry, but not one of these early 
investigators was from Athens. Homeric poetry 
must have been known throughout Greece at the 
beginning of the sixth century, since it seems to 
be assumed as the setting or background for most 
of the earliest poetry. The exact condition of 
that age has been pictured by Xenophanes of 
Colophon, an early and a competent authority, 
bom at about the time of the usurpation of Peisis- 
tratus, and therefore trained in Ionia in the ver- 
sion then current, before any recension by the 
tyrant was possible. He regarded the familiarity 
with Homer as universal, something all had 
known from earliest childhood. This Xenophanes 



THE ARGUMENTS OF WOLF 61 

was much offended by the immorality of the 
Homeric gods and severely criticised the poet for 
his descriptions of divine baseness. To him 
HierOy the tyrant of Syracuse, is assumed to have 
replied, **This Homer whom you revile, although 
dead, continues to support ten thousand servants, 
while you with difficulty can maintain but two/' 
Even if this story be apocryphal, it gives some 
indication of the great popularity of Homeric-^ 
poetry. We know that the recitation of Homeric 
poetry was early established as a custom in 
Sicyon, for Cleisthenes in jealousy of Argos for- 
bade the Homeric bards the privilege of public 
recital. This expulsion of these bards must have 
been at least a generation before Peisistratus 
could have revised the poems. 

The entire Greek world at that time regarded 
Homer as its teacher and its prophet. Was that 
world likely to exchange the Homer it knew for 
a strange and interpolated Homer f The Greeks 
were always a conservative people, extremely 
tenacious of old customs and of old institutions, 
so that epic poetry continued to be composed for 
more than a thousand years in the verse and dia- 
lect of Homer ; Tyrtaeus, the great Lacedaemonian 
war poet, might compose his fiery anapaests in 
the native dialect of Sparta, but when he used 
dactyls, he must show their Ionic origiQ ; and even 
an Athenian dramatist, when composing for an 
Athenian audience, felt it necessary to give a 
foreign color to his choral songs, since they must 



62 THE UNITY OF HOMER 

show their alien birth. This persistent conserva- 
tism of the Athenians, despite the ruin brought 
by Persian fire and devastation, repeatedly ham- 
pered Pericles in his plans for beautifying the 
Acropolis, and this conservatism gave to the 
Amphictyonic Council that power which was made 
in the hands of Philip so disastrous to the liberty 
of Greece." 

This conservatism is the very breath of Greece 
and still survives. In November, 1901, the public 
use of a revised text of the Bible led to a bloody 
riot in which eight persons were slain, the min- 
istry overthrown, and the Metropolitan forced 
to flee; and in 1903 an attempt to produce in 
the theater a play of Aeschylus in modernized 
speech led to a riot. In view of this Hellenic 
trait it seems incredible that Homeric bards and 
scholars should abandon the Homer they knew 
and without a murmur accept the interpolated 
edition of a state so obscure intellectually and 
politically as Athens was at the end of the sixth 
century. This Peisistratean theory involves not 
only their acceptance of this Athenian Homer, but 
their silent acceptance as well, since no writer has 
ever mentioned any struggle as arising from the 
change. 

It must be remembered that there never was 
in historical times anything resembling a united 
Greece. Even in the Persian Wars many of the 

B A fuller diflcuBBion of Athenian influence on the text of 
Homer, with reference to the recent literature, has been publiahed 
in Class. PhU. VI, 419 ft. and IX, 395 ff. 



THE ARGUMENTS OF WOLF 63 

Greek states joined the foe, and in sneh patriotic 
states as Athens there seems to have been a pro- 
Persian party, ^here never was a nnited Greece 
and there never was any body of men who formed 
a literary Academy or Sanhedrin, competent and 
authorized to pass on questions of poetry and 
revisions of text ; so that even if Peisistratus had 
revised Homer there was no power in Greece to 
bring about its unquestioned acceptance. * The 
most improbable thing in regard to this theory is 
that Greek bards would all have accepted a new 
version in absolute silence and no one would have 
raised his voice in protest. 

Attention has already been called to the fact 
that Onomacritus was banished in the time of 
Peisistratus for adding a verse to the poetry of 
MusaeuSy and in a later age Lycon, the comic actor 
and friend of Alexander, was fined the enormous 
sum of ten talents for interpolating a single line 
in a comedy, a fine which would have ruined him 
had it not been paid by Alexander.* A public 
sentiment which would not tolerate these trifling / 
changes in minor authors never grew up among 
a people accustomed to wholesale changes in the 
almost sacred text of Homer. 

The great scholars of Alexandria never re- 
ferred to the work of Peisistratus, and although 
they quote manuscripts of Homer which came 
from Sinope, Crete, Cyprus, Chios, Marseilles, 
and the most diverse parts of Greece, they never 

• Flickingery op. oU., 191. 



64 THE UNITY OF HOMER 

mention a manuscript as coming from Athens. 
Equally significant is the fact that no one of the 
great Homeric scholars was a native of Attica. 
The knowledge of Homer in an age before a 
reading public was possible must for the most 
part have been carried from place to place by 
reciters or rhapsodes. Theref ore, if an Athenian 
version of the sixth century was to take the place 
of an earlier version, it must have been carried 
to favor by rhapsodes from Athens. Yet we have 
I no knowledge of any such Athenian reciters. The 
classical description of these wandering Homeric 
evangelists is given by Plato in his Ion. From 
this we learn that even in Athens that famous 
reciter was from Ephesus, and those especially 
renowned for their appreciation and interpreta- 
tion of Homer were Metrodorus of Lampsacus, 
Stesimbrotus of Thasos, and Glaucon, apparently 
from Rhegium; yet if Homer were really **The 
Gift of Athens/* as Professor Gilbert Murray 
asserts, it seems too much to believe that Ionian 
bards would come to Athens, exchange their 
Homer for a new version, but never make a refer- 
ence to that fact. In Athens nearly all forms 
of Greek art and literature reached their perfec- 
tion. The Ionic and Doric columns originated 
elsewhere, but the best of each has been found at 
Athens; philosophy had its birth in Ionia, but 
the greatest philosophers were Socrates, Plato, 
and Aristotle; histories also were first written 



THE AEGUMENTS OF WOLF 65 

on the eastern shores of the Aegean, but the 
greatest history was the work of Thucydides. 
Rhetoric, oratory, comedy, and tragedy originated 
outside of Attica, but all reached their zenith 
there. The epic alone of all the early forms of 
literature seems never to have stirred the creative 
genius of Attica — ^no Athenian has ever been men- 
tioned who gained distinction by the creation of 
epic poetry. It is evident that Athens lay outside ' 
those movements which created and preserved the \ 
epic treatment of heroic tales. 

How did the tradition in regard to Peisistratus 
arise? Athens in common with other Greek states 
had public recitations of Homeric poetry, and/ 
somehow a regulation came into force forbidding 
the reciter to cull out the portions which would 
win the greatest favor, and commanding him to\ 
follow the established order of the poems; .that 
is, a bard could not recite the * * Parting of Hector 
and Andromache,*' then follow it with the ** Death 
of Hector, ' * since all the advantage would be with 
the bard who recited first. The first bard must 
recite the poem in its accepted order, and the 
second bard must take up the story where the 
first had left off. The very fact that such decrees 
could be deemed necessary shows that there was 
even then an established sequence, for discon- 
nected songs could have no regular order. The 
scholiast to Pindar (N. n, 2) says: **The poetry 
of Homer being delivered in portions formerly, 



66 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

each of the contestants recited whatever part he 
wished." Thus this simple regulation was in- 
tended to give each contestant a fair chance by 
prohibiting the early contenders from selecting 
all the choicest portions. This is the ^^ scattered 
songs of Homer," which has given rise to the 
myth of Peisistratus as the preserver of the 
Homeric songs and the creator of the Homeric 
Y epics. The theory that the Homer recited at the 
Great Panathenaic Festival included all the great 
mass of early poetry, is utterly discredited by the 
words of the orator Lycurgus (chap. 26) : **Our 
fathers forbade the recitation of any other poetry 
than that of Homer" and by the clear statement 
of Isocrates that Homer's greatness in the eyes 
of the fathers consisted in the fact that he pic- 
tured the Greeks not as fighting each other but 
the barbarians {Panegyricus 159). 

The theory that men who never wrote a great 
line of poetry could with scissors and paste create 
the two greatest poems of the world shows the 
fathomless depths of human credulity. Bentley, 
England's foremost scholar and most famous 
critic, has in his edition of Milton given for all 
time the classic example of the huge chasm be- 
tween pure erudition and high poetry. Two 
quotations from this edition of Bentley will illus- 
trate. 

No light, but rather darkness visible 
Served only to discover sights of woe. 

—Milton P. L. I, 63 f . 



THE AEGUMENTS OF WOLF 67 

To the learned and reasoning brain of Bentley 
'^darkness visible" was a monstrosity, so he made 
sense by changing it thus: 

No light, but rather a transpicuous gloonL. 

And 

Our torments also may, in length of time, 
' Become our elements. 

—P. L. II, 274. 

This becomes under the learned touch of Bentley : 

Thus, as was well-observed, our torments may 
Become our elements. 

It seems incredible that any one could have sug- 
gested the prose phrase **a8 was well-observed*' 
as an improvement of Milton. 

The constant assumption made by all the 
critics that meaningless or contradictory scenes 
were added to the poems has never presented any 
satisfactory grounds for explaining why a people 
of the acute literary sense of the Greeks would 
accept these postulated blunders. Two things are 
necessary for such interpolations: first, stupid 
bards, and, second, stupid audiences. Theognis 
in the beginning of his poem says : ^ ^ No one will 
accept the worse, when the better is present." 
But this interpolation theory just reverses that 
and proclaims: ^^No one will keep the better, 
when the worse is present" — ^not only keep the 
worse, but cast out and forget the better. I wish 
Wilamowitz or some other prophet of the gospel 
of the better Iliad destroyed to make room for 



68 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

the inferior would illustrate by concrete examples 
where the Greeks destroyed the good to make way 
for the bad. They might remove the inferior to 
put in its place the better or the perfect, but where 
have they admitted the bad when the good was 
at hand? ' An artistic sense which demanded the 
literary finish of the Pindaric odes, which called 
into being the dramas of Sophocles, and made 
Demosthenes strive for the very perfection of 
oratorical expression, was the public sentiment 
which the critics assume quietly accepted interpo- 
lations that defaced the most cherished of all their 
possessions, the poetry of Homer. 

Not only were no changes made in the text of 
Homer by Peisistratus, but no one before him or 
after him has succeeded in materially altering the 
Homeric text. No two persons could copy the 
same words in exactly the same way, lines from 
memory would slip in, others would drop out, but 
no passage so extended as ten verses has been 
lost from or added to the poetry of Homer. Also 
the language of the present Vulgate is essentially 
the same as that in which the poems were orig- 
inally composed. All quotations made from 
Homer are in virtually the same dialect as that 
found in the existing manuscripts, and, whatever 
the native speech of the writer, the language of 
Homer was not changed into that speech ; Herodo- 
tus of Halicarnassus, Plato of Athens, Timaeus 
of Sicily, Plutarch of Boeotia, and Strabo of 
Pontus, all quote Homer in the same dialect, with 



THE AEGUMENTS OF WOLF 69 

no attempt to change his speech into their own 
vernacular. These men could paraphrase Homer, 
each in his own speech, but when quoting him as 
poetry, the language or dialect of the poem 
remained Homeric. 

There is one proof that there never was any 
serious or conscious attempt to modernize the 
poetry of Homer which more than answers all 
contrary arguments, and that is the evidence of 
the lost letter, the consonant digamma. We know 
since the time of Bentley that the poetry of Homer 
in all parts of the poems made use of a letter 
which was early lost in Ionic Greek' and which 
never appeared in Attic literature, and in gen- 
eral was unsuspected by the bards or scholars to 
whom we owe the preservation of the poems of 
Homer. The loss of this letter caused apparent 
anarchy in the Homeric meter and seemingly per- 
mitted a word ending in a short vowel to be fol- 
lowed by an initial vowel, the forbidden hiatus, 
or permitted a short vowel to be scanned as long 
before a single consonant. The restoration to 
Homer of this lost consonant is regarded as one 
of the greatest feats of modem scholarship. 

These apparent metrical defects were the de- 
spair of Homeric editors and greatly discounted 
the fame of the poet tmtil Bentley proved that 
nearly all these defects could be righted on the 
theory that this consonant, which survived longer 

r Smyth, Greek Didleets, 889: ''The soimd of digamma was 
praetie^y dead in Ana Minor at least by the year 700 B.o. and 
in Attika by the commencement of the sixth century." 



72 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

of Homer kept alive the proofs of a lost letter, 
a letter they did not comprehend, and preferred 
to hand on a text which seemed full of metrical 
errors rather than to apply simple and uniform 
laws of phonetics of their own language, convinces 
me that they have made no changes of a more 
difScult and intricate character, and that those 
who have so faithfully preserved for posterity 
this old and unused digamma can be trusted to 
have honestly conserved the text of Homer in 
those places where change would have been dif- 
ficult to make and easy to detect. Men who will 
not swallow gnats may safely be trusted with 
camels.' 

s I wiBh to acknowledge mj great indebtedness to Professors 
Lndwieh and Allen for much of the material used above. This 
indebtedness is specified in my two articles on "Athenian Interpo- 
laUons in Homer" (CZoml PhiL, YL, 419, and IX, 395). 



J 



CHAPTER m 

THE LINGUISTIC ARGUMENTS 

The forces set in motion by the arguments of 
Wolf had immediate and far-reaching influence, 
but it is highly significant that few German or 
English writers who have an independent literary 
reputation, apart from scholarship, have been 
permanently convinced that the poetry of Homer 
could have been created except by a single person. "? 
Goethe, who began to write about the poetry of 
Homer as early as 1766, or nearly thirty years 
before the work by Wolf appeared, was swept 
off his feet by the seeming authority and broad 
learning there displayed. He accepted what was 
declared to be the united historical testimony 
of antiquity and, although he was slow to give 
up his belief in a single Homer, expressed him- 
self as relieved of the danger of challenging com- 
parison in his own works with the great Homer, 
for now he could hope to rival one of the group 
who wrote the Hiad and the Odyssey, even if he 
could not the undivided Homer. In his Hermann 
tmd Dorothea, 294 ff., he rejoices that now he is 
not called upon to contend with gods, since there 
is no longer a single Homer. However, as he 
became more and more steeped in the poetry 




74 THE UNITY OF HOMER 

of Homer, he became once more convinced of 
Homeric unity, in spite of the historical proofs 
advanced by Wolf, and at that time unanswered ; 
and he referred to Wolf as a beast of prey, Raub- 
getier, who had wounded and despoiled him. In 
1827 he wrote his final opinion on Homer as fol- 
lows: ^^ Homer is a noble unity and the poems 
^ handed down under his name could have sprung 
only from one mighty genius/'^ 

Schiller reread his Homer at the appearance 
of the Prolegomena and wrote to Goethe that he 
had actuaUy been swimming in a sea of poetry; 
and later he referred to Wolf's theory as bar- 
baric. Wieland still adhered to a single Homer, 
and Voss, ignorant of the weakness of the his- 
torical arguments so boldly advanced, wrote to 
Wolf: **In spite of all I still believe in one Iliad, 
in one Odyssey, and in one Homer as the sole 
father of them both. ' ' In the face of what seemed 
tmanswerable proofs drawn from language, his- 
tory, and archaeology, such eminent critics as 
De Quincey, Shelley, Matthew Arnold, and Andrew 
Lang have stoutly upheld, on poetic grounds alone, 
the unity of the Homeric poems. The fact that 
these men of letters felt the poetic necessity for 
unity, even though all other arguments seemed 
adverse, is a matter of the very greatest impor- 
tance. In the long run it will be seen that, when 
the matter at issue is purely one of poetry, no man 

1 All references to Goethe are based on W. J. Keller, "Goethe's 
Estimate of the Greek and Latin Writers," tTniversity of Wis- 
consin BfUleiin, No. 786. 



THE LINGUISTIC AEGUMBNTS 75 

in Germany was so competent a judge as Ger- 
many's greatest poet; and I am not likely to be 
worried by defects the grammarians discover 
when Goethe and Schiller could not find them. 

Wolf's Prolegomena was called by him Volume 
One. In it he presented the external, the his- 
torical proofs, and reserved for Volume Two 
the internal proofs of diverse authorship. Voss 
wrote to him and urged him to hasten the second 
volume, using these words : 

Grant that Homer could not write his own name, 
and so much will I concede that your arguments have 
ahnost demonstrated, still to my thinking that only 
enhances the glory of the poet. The unity of the poet, 
and the unity of his works, are to me unshaken ideas. 
But what thenf I am no bigot in my creed, so as to 
close my ears against all arguments, and these argu- 
ments, let me say plainly, you now owe to us all, 
arguments drawn from the internal structure of the 
Homeric poems. You have wounded us, Mr. Wolf, in 
our aflfections, you have affronted us, Mr. Wolf, in our 
tenderest sensibilities. But still we are just men, ready 
to listen, willing to hear and forbear. Meanwhile the 
matter cannot rest here. You owe it, Mr. Wolf, to the 
dignity of the subject, not to keep back those proofs 
which doubtless you possess, proofs, observe, conclusive 
proofs. 

Although Wolf lived twenty-nine years of active 
life after the appearance of Volume One, Volume 
Two never appeared, and nothing resembling it 
was found among his unpublished papers. 

Wolf never attempted to furnish those internal 
proofs of diverse authorship. That task has been 
the chief occupation of most of his followers, and 



y 



76 THE UNITY OF HOMER 

in their own minds they have brought forth 
such overwhehning evidence of contradictions and 
absurdities, such diversities of language, meter, 
customs, and civilization that the Homeric Ques- 
tion has been completely reversed. The doubt 
whether one genius could have created such 
wealth of poetry has become the assurance that 
no one man could be responsible for so many 
absurdities. It is no longer the envy of a Goethe 
which begrudges the awarding of so much glory 
to a single Homer, but the magnanimity of a 
Wilamowitz which acquits him of the crime. 
Fick, with righteous indignation, exclaims : * * The 
present Odyssey is a crime against human intelli- 
gence.*" Muelder with a touch of sadness re- 
marks : * * It is really too bad that the poet of the 
Odyssey tried his powers in a species of poetry 
for which he had neither the creative ability nor 
the powers of expression.'" And Wilamowitz, 
convinced that no great poem could be produced 
by a group of men, devotes his energies to 
attempting to prove that Homer is but wretched 
poetry, and he scorns the '^fanatics, defenders of 
unity, who admire the divine Homer. *** The Hiad 
is a ** miserable piece of patchwork,** ein uhles 
Flickwerk.^ He regrets that most of the really 

^Die Entstehung der OdjfMee, 168. 

^Hermes 28, 448. ''Es ist eigentlich sehade daas er seine 
G«8taltaiig8kraft in den Dienst einer Dichtart gestellt hat, deren 
stoffliche Voraussetzungen und deren Ausdrucksmittol er auch nicht 
annahemd beherrschte. " 

« Die Iliaa wid Homer, 

^Idem, 322. 




THE LINGUISTIC ARGUMENTS 77 

great scenes of Homer, scenes he could so easily 
supply, have yielded to miserable and impossible 
pieces of poetic absurdity. 

If Fick, Muelder, Wilamowitz, and the rest 
h;|ve won, they have banished Homer, and with 
im all the literature of Greece and Bome as well. 
For all their great writer ^regarded Homer as the 
perfection of literature, they set him up as the 
unapproachable, and if they failed so utterly in 
their calmest judgment, we can have but little 
interest in their own productions. We have the 
best possible evidence of their own literary wis- 
dom in the works they themselves produced. 
When the age that could inspire and create a 
Plato and an Aristotle still regarded Homer as 
the perfection of literary achievement, I respect 
the opinion of that age. When Plato and Aristotle 
agree in regard to the supreme excellence of a 
Greek writer, I shall not question their judgment. 
If Milton, Tennyson, Matthew Arnold, and Lowell 
have ever called anything in English poetry per- 
fect, I shall not be worried if some prosaic and 
foreign grammarian challenges that verdict. 

If Homer is forced into poetic bankruptcy, 
then all Greece goes down in the wreck, for Plato, 
with the best of all that Greece had produced 
before him, called him **the wisest,'* **the best 
and most divine of poets,'* **the poet wise in all 
things,*' **the most poetic and the first of the 
writers of tragedy," and Aristotle said of him, 
'* Homer the divine poet superior in aU things to 



J. 




^8 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

1^ all others. ' ' If one declares a note worthless, that 
^ worthlessness includes not only the signers but 
the endorsers as well, and Homer is too heavily 
endorsed to be the only one involved in that fail- 
ure, for he has the unlimited guaranty not only 
of the greatest writers of Greece, but of Cicero, 
Horace, Vergil, Seneca, and Quintilian, the great- 
est of Italy ; and also of Ooethe and Schiller, the 
greatest of Oermany. It is hard to believe that 
the united opinion of the real literary leaders of 
civilization is so utterly mistaken. Not a single 
writer of early Greece ever detected one fault in 
Homer as poetry. All the criticism leveled by 
early philosophers at his poetry was aimed at the 
representation of the gods. Even Plato, who 
dreaded the moral results of a conception of the 
gods which made them treacherous, revengeful, . 
deceitful, and immoral, still regarded Homer as ^ 
*Hhe most divine of poets. "^^^'^ '^/^^P* ^h<^^f 
It seems strange in the face of this unanimous 
opinion of the really great poets and writers of 
all ages that the disintegrating arguments of 
Wolf and his successors should have won so 
complete a victory that at the beginning of this 
century they were practically alone in the field. 
I heard Professor Seymour say in the summer 
of 1897, in a lecture delivered at the University 
of Chicago, that he knew of no competent scholar 
who believed in the unity of Homer. Harper's 
Classical Dictionary, published in 1896, says under 
the word ** Homer*': ** Probably no one who has 




1 



f^ 



THE LINGUISTIC ARGUMENTS 79 

a right to an opinion on the subject now holds 
to the unity of the poems.** In Wright's History 
of Greek Literature, published in 1907, we read 
on page 31 : *^ Time has repressed the Unitarians 
and all scholars are now Separatists." A little 
earlier Huxley enumerated in the list of the 
achievements of science the fact that the unity 
of authorship of the Iliad was successfully 
assailed by scientific criticism.* Lachmaun, with 
that air of authority which most of the higher 
critics assume, wrote: ^^Any one who does not 
comprehend how Homer sprang from and through 
small songs will waste his time in studying either 
what I write or epic poetry itself, for he has not 
the ability to understand any part of either.**^ 
Though the critics of Homer agreed that they 
had driven the one poet from the Iliad and the 
Odyssey, they agreed in nothing else, and if there 
was something like peace where once there had 
been controversy, it was not the peace which 
comes from harmony but from the conviction that 
nothing was left deserving a struggle. 

In the last few years five of the champions of 
Homeric criticism, Fick, Robert, Muelder, Bethe, 
and Wilamowitz have set forth in detail what 
each regarded as the real and original Iliad. 
Fick thought that the part of the Iliad which was 
really worth while covered 1936 verses, or a trifle 
less than one-eighth of the poem. In this better 
and nobler Iliad there is no parting scene be- 

• Shorey, Amerieana, snb ▼. Homer. 

T Quoted by Gerlach, PhUologva, XXX, 43. 



■^. 



80 THE UNITY OF HOMER 

tween Hector and Andromache, none of the great 
speeches spoken by the ambassadors and Achilles 
in Achilles' tent, no games, and nothing of that 
most dramatic scene ever written, the scene be- 
tween Achilles and Priam, when Priam obtained 
the dead body of his son. Robert reconstructed 
his better Hiad out of 2146 verses, excluding the 
famous scene on the walls of Troy where Helen 
pointed out to the aged Trojans the leaders of 
the Greeks, and oddly enough he excludes the 
account of the death of Hector, admitting but 
four verses from that wonderful book. Bethe 
puts the true Iliad at about 1300 verses, or prac- 
tically one-twelfth of the entire. poem. Wilam- 
owitz casts out large portions of the Iliad, but 
he regards F and O, books absolutely rejected by 
Fick, Robert, and Bethe, as essentially original 
and unchanged. Wilamowitz cannot reconstruct 
an original poem out of the existing Iliad, since 
he regards the present poem as for the most part 
the work of blunderers and blockheads, men who 
removed the old and the noble poetry and then 
substituted inferior verses of their own or of 
others for the great poetry of the original. These 
better parts were all lost as soon as they were 
removed, no one has ever quoted or referred to 
thejn, and this greatest of all losses was never 
suspected until discovered by the great critic in 
our own day. Wilamowitz has been able to give 
an outline of much of the better and nobler Hiad, 
but has modestly refrained from writing in full 



THE LINGUISTIC ARGUMENTS 81 

that greater poem which he regards as alone 
worthy the world ^s mightiest poet. It is weU 
to observe, however, that Homer has long been 
regarded as the greatest of aU poets not because 
of the poem which Wilamowitz imagines, but 
because of the Iliad and the Odyssey which we 
actually have. Homer's reputation depends on 
no hypothetical creation but on poetry now exist- 
ing. It was because of this poetry that a man of 
Macaulay 's vision and judgment reached the con- 
clusion that Shakespeare alone could challenge 
comparison with Homer.® 

Muelder disagrees with all the rest and has 
recreated an original Iliad of his own. He re- 
gards the parts commonly considered as late as 
being early and the so-called early parts as late. 
If the critics have agreed in anything they have 
agreed in making the story of AchiUes the oldest 
parts of the poem, and they have regarded the 
exploits of other Greek heroes as the work of 
late bards, but Muelder thinks the story of 
Achilles the latest of aU, a sort of literary mortar 
by which the older parts are held together. 

These five men do not agree in regard to one 
single verse, and every line in Homer has been 
rejected by at least two of them. There can be 
no Homeric scholarship, no literary appreciation, 
under such leadership, for Homer ceases to be a 
poet and his work poetry, and becomes merely a 
theory of Fick, of Robert, of Muelder, of Bethe, 

8 Trevelyan^ Life and Letters of Macavlay, iSarperS; 1876, 
II, 93. 




82 THE UNITY OF HOMER 

of WilamowitZy and of the rest. It has detached 
itself from learning as well as from poetry, and 
has simply become a game of bUndman's buff in 
a swamp, in which no one is able to catch any- 
thing, and the player has no idea of whai he is 
trying to catch. Homer in such hands will inspire 
no more poetry. Dnring more than a century 
Homeric scholarship has devoted itself to the task 
of finding errors, contradictions, and absurdities 
in both poems, so that Wilamowitz, the last and 
the mightiest of the revilers of the Hiad, in his 
recent work has used practically every word and 
form of contempt of which the German language 
is capable. I notice the following words of appre- 
ciation of the genius of Homer in the few pages, 
160-170, of his Die Bias und Homer: erbUrmliche, 
unertrdglich, wie sehr sie gef alien hat, Das hat 
der Bearheiter nicht thun mogen, herzlich alhern 
und gam zwecklos, unhehaglich, Der Dichter htU 
recht fliichtig gearbeitet. Yet Horace said of this 
very poet, qui nil molitur inepte. Too bad that 
Horace could not have taken a course on literary 
appreciation under this great critic! 

When I began my work as a student of Homer 
it was in complete accord with the milder of these 
disintegrating theories, and I had accepted for 
my own belief the theory of Jebb, Leaf, and 
Christ, known as the Ur-Ilias, or the Original- 
Hiad theory, which presupposes an older poem in 
which one hero was brought forward, an original 
Iliad of moderate compass, containing the exploits 



THE LINGUISTIC ARGUMENTS 83 

of Achilles as far as the slaying of Hector. To 
this had been added by later hands most of the 
scenes in which Achilles is not a participant, as 
well as the scene with the ambassadors in I, the 
games in ^, and the ransoming of the body of 
Hector in Q. 

The books composing the story of Achilles 
were supposed to have certain well-defined usages 
of langaage, theology, and antiquities which sep- 
arated them from the other books of the Hiad, 
and these other books of the Hiad, though differ- 
ing from the Achilleis, shared these differences 
with the Odyssey. If there was any orthodox 
Homeric opinion twenty years ago, it was that 
the books of the Achilleis were clearly older than 
the rest of the Iliad, and that the non-Achilleid 
books of the Hiad furnished many evidences of 
close aflSnity with the Odyssey. These arguments 
were supported by most of the great names of 
classical scholarship and, so far as I know, were 
not seriously challenged. Such a man of letters 
as Andrew Lang doubted the conclusions drawn 
from these proofs, but the proofs themselves he 
did not question. 

The argument most used to prove that certain 
books of the Hiad have peculiar and intimate 
connection with the Odyssey is the argument 
from vocabulary. The book to which this test 
was most confidently applied was the tenth book 
of the Hiad, the Doloneia. It was shown that this 
tenth book has :many words, the number being 



84 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

seventeen, which are found in no other book of 
the Iliad; but, although found in no other book 
of the Iliad, they are found in the Odyssey. This 
has been the strong argument for the assertion 
that this tenth book of the Iliad is Odyssean and 
it has been repeated in practically all the adverse 
criticisms of this book. 

Some years ago I thought this argument might 
be strengthened by extending a like investigation 
to aU the books of the Iliad, for thus the strength 
of the connection between K and the Odyssey 
might be made more evident by contrast with the 
small number of Odyssean words found in other 
books of the Iliad. By Odyssean words is meant 
words used in the Odyssey and in but one book 
of the Iliad. To my surprise I found that A, one 
of the supposedly old books, had twenty-six words 
found only in that book of the Iliad and in the 
Odyssey; A, another presumably old book, had 
thirty-three such words; 11 had also thirty-three 
Odyssean words; and X, the very heart of the 
Achilleis, actually had thirty-four. That is, each 
book of the ** original Iliad'' had about twice as 
many Odyssean words as K, yet for its Odyssean 
words this book had been exiled from the Iliad. 
It was found that no less than seventeen books 
of the Iliad had more Odyssean words than the 
Doloneia, so that a thorough application of the 
arguments of the critics makes this late book one 
of the oldest of the Iliad. The list of these words 
was published in Classical Philology, vol. V, so 



THE LINGUISTIC ARGUMENTS 85 

that anyone might test them for himself, bnt thus 
far no critic has tried to revive or to defend that 
argument for assigning the Doloneia to the poet 
of the Odyssey, as distinct from the poet of the 
Iliad. Each book of the Odyssey has certain words 
found only in that book and in the Iliad, each book 
of the Iliad has certain words found only in that 
book and in the Odyssey. Each book of the Iliad 
has its own peculiar relations with the Odyssey, 
each book of the Odyssey its own peculiar rela- 
tions with the niad, so that the argument which 
assigns the Doloneia to the poet of the Odyssey 
assigns each book of the Iliad to that poet and 
in turn each book of the Odyssey to the poet of 
the Iliad. 

When the article containing this list was writ- 
ten I was so cowed by the authority and the 
assurance of the critics, especially by such sen- 
tences as ^^No one who has a right to an opinion 
believes in the unity of Homer,'' that I referred 
to **the poets of the Iliad," not daring to believe 
the thing I felt was true, that there was only one 
poet after aU. The arguments were too many 
and too strong against it. 

Another most convincing test was the test 
offered by the use of abstract nouns, since it is 
evident that the adjective good must precede the 
abstract goodness, and holiness must presuppose 
an earlier word, holy. When I restudied the 
arguments drawn from the use of abstracts they 
seemed to me so conclusive that I was glad that 



86 THE UNITY OF HOMER 

I had not in the article mentioned declared my 
belief in a single Homer. This argument advanced 
by Croiset was held by such men as Van Leeuwen 
and Cauer to be unanswerable and it was the main 
support of Croiset in declaring that unity of 
authorship was impossible. In the first edition 
of his Histoire de la litterature grecque he said 
that the Hiad had but thirty-nine abstract nouns 
in 67, w, avvff^ while the Odyssey had eighty-one. 
This difference between thirty-nine and eighty- 
one could show nothing else than the development 
of many generations and would make unity of 
authorship frankly impossible. This argument 
was seized upon by the advanced critics as final, 
and that decision could hardly be questioned, if 
the facts offered by Croiset* were really facts. 

There was no appeal except to Homer and, to 
my great surprise, I found the figures given by 
Croiset for the Iliad must be exactly doubled, 
since the Hiad had not thirty-nine but really had 
seventy-eight of these abstracts. Croiset simply 
published his figures, he did not name the 
abstracts or where they were found; but in the 
reply to his statistics each abstract was named 
with the book and verse in which it was found." 
In these years no one has questioned the truth 
of my statement that the Iliad has seventy-eight 
abstracts, or just twice the number given by 
Croiset. Professor Boiling, an unusually accu- 

• In a later edition Croiset raised the number from 39 to 58. 

10 < < The Belati^e Antiquity of the Hiad and the Odyssej Tested 
by Abstract Nouns, ' ' Classical BeiHew, XXIV, 8 ff . 



THE LINGUISTIC ARGUMENTS 87 

rate scholar^ has tested my figures with the desire 
to destroy them, bnt instead has confirmed them. 
He tries to acquit Croiset by assuming ** errors 
in counting/' **a moment of f orgetf uhiess, " 
'*haplography led to the error,*' and the cool 
assumption that Croiset meant only certain books 
and not the entire Iliad, despite the fact that he 
permitted himself to be quoted by all the critics 
as comparing the entire lUad and the entire 
Odyssey, and also despite the fact that my article 
was republished by German and French period- 
icals and Croiset never made any such defense. 
Professor Boiling agrees, however, in the very 
manner of his apology for these errors, that 
Croiset 's figures are wrong, that the Iliad has 
not thirty-nine but seventy-eight abstracts, and 
that these two poems show a similarity in the 
number of abstracts which can hardly be ex- 
plained except by unity of authorship. 

The arguments based on the development of 
the abstract from the adjective and the proof that 
certain abstracts appear only in the Odyssey, 
while the adjectives from which they are derived 
are found in the Iliad, seem most convincing. 
Both poems are in the same position in this re- 
gard, and there are many abstracts used only 
in the Iliad which are derived from adjectives 
found only in the Odyssey. The following 
abstracts are found only in the Iliad, the adjec- 
tives from which they are derived occur only in 

the Odyssey: rpuxlri^ fivrf/jLoathnj^ i^P^tnj tcarnif^eifi; 



] 

I 

I 

I 



88 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

and the list might be mnch extended. This shows 
how impossible it is to date a word from its first 
appearance, since the adjectives from which these 
abstracts are derived mnst have been known to 
the poet of the Iliad. Croiset in his work on 
Homer discussed certain obsolescent phrases, 
saying that the phrase, 17V? tc M^a? t€, is f onnd 
in the Iliad twenty-five times, in the Odyssey but 
three, though in fact it is found in the Iliad but 
eight times, in the Odyssey but once. It is almost 
pathetic to know that Croiset in his long chapter 
devoted to showing the linguistic differences be- 
tween the Iliad and the Odyssey gave definite 
figures but twice, and both absolutely wrong, for 
the phrase which he said is used in the Iliad 
twenty-five times is used but eight, and the 
abstracts which he said are found in that poem 
but thirty-nine times are found seventy-eight 
times. If both these figures were too small, it 
would be an easy matter to say that he did not 
count certain books or certain verses; then just 
enough could be omitted to get the necessary 
number, but when the figures are in one case too 
small and in the other over three times too large, 
it is not so easy to offer a satisfying solution. 

In such matters the test of language is the 
real test, especially the use of words which might 
escape the notice of the imitator — ^little unob- 
trusive words. Such a word is the definite article, 
o, 17 , tJ, both because it is used so frequently, and 
also because it shows in Homer all the different 



THE LINGUISTIC ARGUMENTS 89 

stages throngh which it passed in changing from 
a pure demonstrative to a simple defining article. 
The demonstrative is the older, the article the 
later development. In Latin the demonstrative 
Ule remained a demonstrative, while in languages 
derived from the Latin, as the French and the 
Italian, the articular use of U and le has been 
developed from the older Ule. If the demonstra- 
tive use is predominant in certain books of Homer 
and the articular in others, then the belief is 
justified that these books were written at different 
periods, and if the divergence be sufficiently great 
they must have been written by different poets, 
also. 

The use of the definite article has furnished 
one of the chief arguments for the comparative 
lateness of the Odyssey. Monro in his Odyssey 
II, 332, says : * * The defining article is much more 
frequent in the Odyssey. * * The use and extension 
of the definite article has lately been the subject 
of repeated investigation, the results of which 
are in such substantial agreement that their 
approximate accuracy cannot be doubted. Koch, 
De Articulo Homerico (Leipzig, 1872), published 
a complete list of all the examples of o, ^, t6 
in Homer, noting whether used as demonstrative 
pronoun, relative pronoun, or as a defining article. 
He gave no figures, but by adding up his various 
lists I found that he assigned 422 examples of the 
definite article to the Iliad, and 214 to the Odyssey, 
that is, he put about twice as many in his list from 



/ 



/\- 




90 THB UNITY OP HOMER 

the niad as he did in his list from the Odyssey. 
Miss F. Melian Stawell in the Appendix to Homer 
and the Iliad published statistics for the use of 
the article which closely agree with those of Koch. 
Stnmmery Ueber den Artikel bei Homer 
(Schweinfurt, 1886 ), written nnder the g^dance 
of von Christy made an effort to support Christ's 
theory of an original Iliad and was very thorough. 
Stummer believed in a more restricted use of the 
definite article than either of the others I have 
named and assigned to a place among demonstra- 
tive pronouns many of the examples given as 
definite articles. The definite article is found 
in the Iliad 218 times, against Koch's 422; in the 
Odyssey 171 times, against Koch's 214. However, 
they agree in this, that they both assign the 
greater number to the Iliad. Stummer tried to 
fit his statistics into the theory of Christ, and 
obtained the foUowing: number of verses in the 
original Iliad 8981 ; example of definite article in 
original Iliad 125, that is, one definite article in 
each 72 verses; verses in addition to the Iliad 
6712 ; examples of definite article in the additions 
to the Iliad 93, or one definite article to each 72 
verses. That is the original Iliad and the addi- 
tions show exactly the same ratio in the use of the 
definite article. No wonder poor Stummer felt 
his pamphlet was a failure, and the disappointed 
reviewer (Bursian's Jahresbericht XL VI, 189), 
said : * * The results of this investigation have not 
the importance one would have been inclined to 
expect. ' ' 




THE LINGUISTIC ARGUMENTS 91 

To continne with the figures given by Stum- 
mer: entire Iliad 15,693 verses, 218 examples of 
the definite article, or one in each 72 verses; 
entire Odyssey 12,110 verses, 171 examples of 
the definite article, or one to each 71 verses. In 
the entire Iliad o is used as a demonstrative pro- 
noun nearly 3000 times, as a definite article 218 
times, or in a ratio of 14:1; in the Odyssey, as 
a demonstrative pronoun 2178 times, as a definite 
article 171 times, or in a ratio of 13 :1. The three 
poems assigned to Hesiod have 2330 verses; the 
definite article is found in Hesiod 62 times, that 
is, once in each 38 verses. This word is found 
in Hesiod as a demonstrative pronoun 404 times, 
as a true definite article 62 times, or in a ratio 
of 7 :1. In the five greater Homeric Hymns there 
are 1914 verses, with 57 examples of the definite 
article, or one in each 33 verses; aad this word 
is used as a demonstrative pronoun 217 times and 
as a true definite article 57 times, that is in a ratio 
of 4:1. To restate these important facts in a 
brief summary : The Iliad has one definite article 
to each 72 verses ; the Odyssey, one definite article 
to each 71 verses; Hesiod, one definite article 
to each 38 verses; Homeric Hymns, one definite 
article to each 33 verses. Batio of the use of the 
demonstrative pronoun to the ratio of the definite 
article: Iliad 14:1; Odyssey 13:1; Hesiod 7:1; 
Homeric Hymns 4 :1. It must be remembered that 
Hesiod and the Homeric Hymns were written in 
the same verse and the same dialect as the Hiad 



. w 



92 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

and the Odyssey, so that this change in the use 
of the article must have been an unconscious 
change. 

There could be no more cogent reason than 
these statistics for assigning the Iliad and the 
Odyssey to a single period, a period widely sep- 
V arated from the time of the origin of the poetry 
of Hesiod and of the Homeric Hymns. Such was 
the spell or pall cast by disintegrating criticism 
that Stummer, Christ, and the rest coldly passed 
by these important facts and saw nothing in them 
but a failure to reach anything of value. From 
the above figures it is clear that the distance from 
Homer to Hesiod is many times greater than the 
distance from Hesiod to the Homeric Hymns ; and 
the slight advance from the Iliad to the Odyssey 
is just what would fall in the life of one man. 

Not only is it impossible to separate the Hiad 
from the Odyssey on the basis of the definite 
article ; but no strata can be thus defined within 
the poems themselves, else the first and the last 
books of the Odyssey, the two books most con- 
fidently regarded as late by the critics, would be 
the oldest, since they show the most restricted 
use of the definite article. 

Dr. Shewan^^ has found that the short forms 
of the dative plural, that is, at?, oi^^ j;?, instead of 
auri^ ouri^ i/crt, occur in the Iliad and the Odyssey 
but once in each 240 verses ; in Hesiod and in the 
Homeric Hymns these short forms occur once in 

11 The Lay of Dolon, 52. 



THE LINGUISTIC ARGUMENTS 93 

each thirty-six verses. Doctor Shewan also found 
by testing typical books of the Iliad that the cases 
where the diphthong must be read in the genitive 
ending of the second declension, a supposedly 
later ending, occurs once in each sixty verses in 
A and in K, while in Hesiod and the Homeric 
Hymns such a genitive is found once in each 
nineteen verses. 

Monro, Homeric Grammar, 344, says : * * Neglect 
of position is perceptibly commoner in the Odyssey 
than in the lUad.'* By neglect of position is 
meant the scansion of a vowel as short before a 
mute consonant and a liquid. Doctor Shewan^' 
has made a list of all these metrical defects and 
finds that there are twenty-nine examples in the 
Hiad and but twenty in the Odyssey — ^numbers 
which closely correspond with the relative size of 
the two poems. He found also that these defects 
occur relatively five times as often in Hesiod and 
the Homeric Hymns as they occur in the Hiad 
and the Odyssey. I have tested the work done 
by Doctor Shewan again and again, and I have 
always found it absolutely reliable. 

This remarkable agreement of the Hiad and 
the Odyssey in these small but important lin- 
guistic matters in contrast with the changes 
found in Hesiod and the Homeric Hymns can have 
but one explanation ; they belong to the same age. 

The Greeks developed in their own language 
after they had separated from the Indo-European 
stock a perfect in ^a, the existing Greek literature 

ttldem, 10& 



94 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

showing the clear development of these perfects 
from a sparing use in the third singular indica- 
tive to a wide use in the other moods. If certain 
books in Homer show free use of this perfect 
while others do not, then we have at hand an easy 
test of their relative antiquity. Such a test has 
not escaped the service of the critics, but it has 
not been useful, since the Hiad has seventeen such 
perfects, the Odyssey thirteen. The thirteen of 
the Odyssey bear about the same ratio to the 
seventeen of the Hiad as the number of verses 
of the Odyssey bears to the number of the Hiad, 
so that the Hiad has one perfect in tea to each 923 
verses, the Odyssey one to each 931 verses. The 
two poems belong to the same period in a per- 
fectly weU-defined stage in the development of 
this perfect." 

Professor Jebb in his tests of the difference 
between the Hiad and the Odyssey said : * * Hiatus 
in the bucolic dieresis is about twice as frequent 
in the Iliad as in the Odyssey.**" By this he 
means that a word ends in a vowel and the fol- 
lowing word begins with a vowel at the end of 
the fourth foot about twice as often in the Odyssey 
as in the Iliad. The fact is that the Hiad has sixty 
examples of this hiatus, the Odyssey sixty-six, 
that is, the two poems have 126 and they are so 
evenly distributed that if three are taken from 
the one and added to the other they will have 

ISA complete discussion of these perfects is foand in Class, 
PhO., VI, 159 ff. 

i« Jebb, Hofner, ed. 5, 139. 



THE LINGUISTIC ARGUMENTS 95 

an identical number. Miss Stawell and I have 
independently counted these examples and have 
reached the same conclusion/' This agreement 
is surprising, even if it had not been an argxmient 
of higher criticism that the difference is so great 
as to make unity of authorship impossible. Jebb 
also added that ^^ books xxm and xxiv share with 
the Odyssey this free use of the hiatus.*' How- 
ever the fact is that O has eight examples of this 
hiatus, E has seven, B has six, A has five, but ^ has 
only four, and is thus in fifth place, and Q and T 
are tied for the ninth place. One of the easiest 
suppositions of the destructive critics is that no 
one will defend certain books of the Iliad, so that 
in discussing these books facts are hardly con- 
sidered necessary. 

Jebb also cites the adjectival use of oiS^v 
as being characteristic of the Odyssey," yet there 
is but a solitary example of this use in the 
Odyssey (8 350) and that€lxtremely doubtful. 
The Hiad has two perfectly clear examples, K 216, 
X 518; but in the face of this, the adjectival use 
of the negative, which is unambiguous only in the 
Hiad, is selected as being a peculiar mark of the 
Odyssey. This is of a piece with the arg^ument of 
the early chorizontes, who said that TrpowdpoiOev 
in a temporal sense is found only in the Odyssey ; 
whereas in fact the Iliad has several examples of 
this temporal use, K 476, A 734, X 197, while there 

18 Homer and the Hiad, 317. 
^•Horner, 18t.^ 



96 THE UNITY OF HOMER 

seems to be but one example in the Odyssey, X 483. 
This use is discussed by Leaf in his note to K 476. 

It is agreed that back of the poetry of Homer 
there must have been songs in the Aeolic dialect, 
for traces of this Aeolic dialect are in all parts 
of Homer. A fairly easy test of the antiquity of 
Homeric books might be furnished by the measure 
of predominance of these early forms, and it is 
well-known that Fick and others have by this test 
tried to select an orig^al Hiad and an orig^al 
Odyssey. No test would seem to be more con- 
vincing than the comparative frequency of the 
occurrences of the Aeolic infinitive in -//*«''• It 
is not found in Ionic- Attic Greek, Homeric poetry 
having inherited it from earlier songs. 

Witte, in an article on the Homeric language 
in Pauly-Wissowa, has shown that the Homeric 
verse has a peculiarly conservative influence just 
before the bucolic dieresis, and adds that Bekker 
has observed that |^ this place in the verse the 
Hiad has 116 infinitives in -^^^v, the Odyssey but 
fifty-one. This great difference can hardly be 
explained by difference in theme, and it must be 
admitted that the poet of the Odyssey has here 
betrayed his comparative lateness, if the figures 
given above are correct. 

Bekker is known as one of the outstanding 
Homeric scholars of the last century; and as he 
is editor of one of the most illustrious recensions 
of the Iliad and the Odyssey, we are fortunately 
able to test his figures in the readings of his own 



THE LINGUISTIC ARGUMENTS 97 

text. His statistics for the Iliad are substantially 
correct; in reading the Iliad in search of these 
infinitives I found 114, as compared with his 
116, and I might easily have overlooked two; 
but in a like search in his own edition of the 
Odyssey I found, -^Eiot his fifty-one — I actually 
found seventy," so that, though his figures for 
the Iliad are essentially correct, those in the 
Odyssey must be increased nearly forty per cent. 
Inasmuch as the Iliad has 3583 more verses than 
the Odyssey, the seventy examples of the Odyssey 
show little relative decline, when compared with 
the 116 of the longer poem. 

When we compare this usage of the Iliad and 
the Odyssey with that of the Homeric Hymns we 
find the greatest contrast, for these hymns have 
this archaic infinitive before the bucolic dieresis 
but once in each one thousand verses, while the 
first four books of the Odyssey have one in each 
one hundred verses. Evi^^tly this form was 
but a learned survival in the age when the 
Homeric hynms were created and many years 
must have separated them from the era which 
produced the Iliad and the Odyssey, whereas the 
identical treatment as revealed in these two great 
poems assigns them to a single epoch. 

The epic poet often honored a man by calling 
him not by his own name but by the name of 
his father, so that Agamemnon is often called 
Atreides, Achilles is called Peleides, and Odysseus 

17 All fhe examples of these inflnitiyes are given in CUub. 
Fha. XTV, 137. 



98 THE UNITY OF HOMER 

is called Laertiades. Wilhelm Meyer wrote a dis- 
sertation on the use of the Homeric patronymics^* 
which was at once hailed as a classic by the higher 
critics. (In 1907 there were no credited Homeric 
critics other than higher critics. ) Meyer 's results 
as given in his own summary are briefly as fol- 
lows: **The patronjnnics grow rarer not only in 
the later portions of the Hiad, but also in all parts 
of the Odyssey. From this decreasing use of the 
patronymic it is evident that there must have been 
an interval of many years between the composi- 
tion of these two poems. ' ^ When I answered this 
article {Class. Phil. VII, 293), I explained the 
difference in numbers in the use of the patro- 
n3rmic as due to the greater preponderance of 
heroes in the Iliad and to the fact that so many 
characters in the Odyssey are ignoble or com- 
monplace, hence the greater number in the Iliad 
is to be expected. Even this explanation is 
entirely unnecessar^l||f or the markedly decreasing 
use of the patron3nnics in the assumedly late 
books is pure fiction, as this simple test will show. 
The two books which Meyer regarded as be- 
longing to the oldest stratum are A and X. The 
following men who appear in A have patronymics : 
Achilles, Calchas, Agamemnon, Menelaus, and 
Patroclus, five in all. The following heroes in 
X have patronymics : Achilles, Agamemnon, Mene- 
laus, and Priam, or four in all. Of those which 
appear in X only one is not found in A, so that 

isDe Someri Fatr(}ny7nu)i9, GN>ttingeny 1907. 



THE LINGUISTIC ARGUMENTS 99 

but six of the men who appear in these two books 
have patron3nnic8. These two books have a com- 
bined length of 1126 verses. 

The book which all the critics put as the latest 
and the worst in Homer is the last book of the 
Odyssey. In this last book of the Odyssey the 
following men are mentioned with the honoring 
patron3nnic : Achilles, Agamemnon, Laertes, Odys- 
seus, Patroclus, Apheidas, and Halitherses, or 
seven in all. Hence these 548 verses of gj have 
one more patronymic than are found in the 1126 
combined verses of A and X. 

A test applied to the first book of the Odyssey, 
another book which the critics have regarded as 
late, shows that it has the following patron3nnics : 
Atreides, Agamemnonides, Mermerides, and Pei- 
senorides, only one of which is found in the Iliad. 
This book in 444 verses has but one less patro- 
nymic than A has in 611, and exactly the same 
as X in 515 verses. Furthermore two of the patro- 
nymics found in a are found only there, though 
each of the patron3nnics of X is found in many 
books of the Iliad. 

One is not obliged to explain the alleged 
change between the Iliad and the Odyssey ; all he 
needs to do is to count the number of patron3nnics. 
No other discussion of this vaunted treatise is 
necessary, for it is absolutely at variance with 
easily tested facts. How could any scholar write 
such an article f How could competent professors 
accept it with the very highest praise f How could 



100 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

editors and scholars receive it as a final and 
authoritative contribution to human knowledge? 
Yet it is on the basis of just such facts as these 
that Huxley believed the critics had scientifically 
demonstrated that the Iliad and the Odyssey could 
not be by a single poet. 

I have never taken up the investigation of any 
assumedly important difference between the lan- 
guage of the Iliad and the Odyssey and found that 
'the underlying statements were true. I do not 
regard as of any importance the fact that the 
Iliad mentions beans and the Odyssey does not, 
or that words for wounds and wounding abound 
in the Iliad, while they are rarely or never used 
in the Odyssey. The observation that the Iliad 
has more references to storms, snows, and the 
phenomena of heaven, an observation which was 
hailed by the critics as if it were the discovery 
of a new planet, made little impression on me, 
so little that I did not answer the argument when 
it first appeared, because the answer was so easy 
that I thought the writer thereof would see it and 
receive the credit of retraction without outside 
suggestion; but the author did not see that the 
reason for the fewer references in the Odyssey 
is because the action of that poem is mostly under 
roof, while the Iliad and its setting are out of 
doors, with warriors in the field. We move in 
the Odyssey from palace to palace, first in Ithaca, 
then in Pylos, then in Sparta, and then back to 
Ithaca. Nature withdraws as we stand under 



THE LINGUISTIC ARGUMENTS 101 

cover, and the average person learns more of 
the phenomena of heaven in one week's camping 
than in an entire lifetime in the city. Weather 
is only an incident in towns, but it governs every- 
thing in the tent and field. The less frequent 
references to the phenomena of heaven do not 
show any less '' sensibility to natural phenomena'' 
but do show that Homer knew that storms, clouds^ 
and the sky mean more to men living in camps 
or in the fields than they do to inhabitants of the 
towns. 

These and a hundred other similar differences 
which must exist between poems of different or 
similar themes, even by the same poet, are of no 
importance. The real tests are found in the 
hidden matters of meter, digamma, abstract 
nouns, patronymics, Aeolic forms, formations of 
the perfect, hiatus, case endings, and such uncon- 
scious indications of the poet's land and age. All 
these proofs once widely accepted as sufficient evi- 
dence of diverse authorship have utterly broken 
down, because, when tested by the facts, they have 
been found to rest on false assertions and false 
statistics. Doctor Shewan, Miss Stawell, Pro- 
fessor Shorey, Professor Bassett,as well as others 
in England, Germany, France, Italy, and else- 
where, have tested other phases of these so-called 
proofs, and they have generally found the statis- 
tics and the assertions entirely wrong. In ten 
years no higher critic has tried to reestablish one 
of these demolished arguments. The only counter 



102 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

attack is a feeble remonstranoe that, although the 
assertions we have attacked are false, perhaps 
these errors may have sprang up in some other 
way ; thus the critics hope to shift the attack and 
to set up a new science which will not expose the 
errors of higher criticism, but will waste itself 
in discussion of the genesis of these errors. We 
are only remotely interested in the way these 
errors arose; all we desire is the admission that 
they are errors, and that Homer has been unjustly 
attacked. 

So long as the critics assumed a superior atti- 
tude and remained in the clouds and said: ''We 
can feel here the great difference from the old 
epic,'* "Here we can detect the ring of the old 
epic coin,*' or **He who cannot grasp this fact, 
should not busy himself with epic poetry, for he 
is incompetent to understand'' — ^no one dared 
to show his lack of any true aesthetic feeling by 
venturing to doubt them. Such critics needed to 
present no evidence, for, as Cicero says in his 
Tusc. Disp. I, 49, "Who, although they present no 
arguments, could yet crush us by their very 
authority," Qui ut rationem nullam adferrent, 
ipsa auctoritdte nos frangerent. But when they 
grew impatient at staying in the clouds and 
began to present facts and figures, then we could 
test their assertions and examine their evidence. 
Higher criticism committed suicide when it 
J fretted at being a cult and aspired to become a 
science. 



i 



THE LINGUISTIC ARGUMENTS 103 

The pretenses of the critics seem such a sham 
that one wonders if after all they are not speaking 
in some cipher, some hidden code, so that when 
they say six they mean fourteen, when they say 
nine they mean five, and so for all their other 
facts and figures. Then, of coarse, what they 
mean was never to be detected from that which 
they say, and all our labor has been wasted 
labor, and they have inwardly laughed at our 
discomfiture. It is only on the basis of some 
cryptogram that I can explain Gilbert Murray *s 
theory" that the Homeric Greeks were men under 
a vow of sexual chastity, since next to fighting 
their greatest efforts were spent in breaking any 
such vows; or Thomson's theory of expurgation,^*^ 
based on the assumption that Homer has not a 
trace of the envy of the gods. Does not Menelaus 
complain that it was the envy of the gods which 
had prevented him and Odysseus from spending 
their old age together? Does not Penelope lament 
that it was divine envy which had taken away her 
husband in her youth? I can offer no other ex- 
planation of Menrad's attempt'^ to show that 
Odysseus was a sun-god. Menrad says: **The 
twelve companions who went with Odysseus to 
explore and visit the haunts of Circe were the 
twelve months.*' Yet Homer definitely fixes the 
number at forty-five I Menrad says, **the 118 
suitors are the 118 days of the winter months," 

19 Rise of Greek Epic, 152. 

» Studies ffi the Odyssey, 11. 

SI Der Urmythus der Odyssee, 26, 42. 



104 THE UNITY OF HOMER 

bnt Homer explicitly tells ns that there were 108 
suitors. How did he get these figures? Had he 
never read Homer, or did he use some cryptogram 
from a hidden cipher T Or is scholarship so limp 
a thing that facts are nothing and one may sub- 
stitute anything one chooses for anything that is 1 

Saddest of all is the fact that, for about a 
century, Homeric criticism has lived apart from 
Homer. Each new theory is accepted as an addi- 
tion to human knowledge, with no attempt to test 
it by the evidence of the poems themselves. The 
best possible proof that higher critics have made 
no real study of Homer is furnished by the fact 
that not a single one of them has ever indepen- 
dently detected any of the errors to which I have 
called attention above. 

Van Leeuwen, the great Hellenist of Holland 
and for a generation one of the leading destruc- 
tive critics of Homer, just as he was laying 
down his lifers work, wrote these pathetic words 
{Mnemosyne, 1910, 341) : 

I recognize the error in which I have long been in- 
volved, since now I see the better way. The fault was 
in our teachers who taught us the things they thought 
were true, which we in turn presented to our pupils. I 
now proclaim openly my belief. The context of the Iliad 
and the Odyssey cannot be loosed without the ruin of 
the whole. Each is a single poem, conceived, elaborated, 
composed by a single poet. The poetry of Homer will 
continue to live so long as we x>ermit it to remain entire, 
but it will die, pass away, and slip through our fingers, 
if we undertake to dissect it or to tear it apart. 



> 



THE LINGUISTIC ARGUMENTS 105 

Boemer in his last work^ Homerische Aufsdtee, 
published in his seventieth year^ said, ^'Most men 
who have spent their lives with Homer have never 
given Homer a chance." That is the simple 
truth; Homer has not been given a chance and 
most students who have done work on Homer 
have been directed to find errors and contradic- 
tions where none exist. These disintegrating 
arguments, based on false statistics, have been 
wax in the ears of nearly all students of Homer. 
Their ears have never had a chance to catch the 
music of his songs; they have been as deaf to 
the voice of Homer as were the companions of 
Odysseus to the voice of the Sirens. 

The linguistic attack on Homer, the most 
serious that could be devised, has entirely failed 
to create a presumption of diverse authorship. 
Instead, this attack has made it most improbable 
that two poems of such great length could show 
such practical identity of language, unless they 
were the creation of a single age and of a single 
poet. 



CHAPTER IV 

THE ANTIQUITIES AND B^NDRED 

MATTERS 

The assumed differences in language have 
furnished the chief argument for the modem 
chorizontes, but this argument has been sup- 
ported on all sides by the assumption of differ- 
ences or contradictions in geography, topography, 
chronology, customs, reUgion, government, and 
the greatest divergences of every sort. The list 
is formidable and apparently overwhehning. 
These differences were assumed to prove not only 
that the Iliad and the Odyssey were not the work 
of a single poet but that each poem was itself 
made up of a mass of individual and contradictory 
songs. 

Professor Rothe's recent book in defense of 
the unity of the Odyssey, Die Odyssee als Dicht- 
ung, was supposedly crushed by the unanswerable 
arguments presented by Finsler and Wilamowitz, 
that the first four books of the Odyssey demand 
as their background the heat of summer, although 
the story of Odysseus from his arrival in the land 
of the Ehaeacians until his reunion with Penelope 
demands the cold and raw temperature of the 
late autumn and early winter. The whole story 
of the Odyssey covers only about forty days. 



ANTIQUITIES AND KINDRED MATTERS 107 

If part of it assumes as its setting the heat of 
summer and the rest the cold of early winter it 
would obviously be impossible to embrace both 
these seasons in a space of forty days. The poets 
of the Odyssey have thus betrayed themselves by 
these careless references, and the poem in its 
present form must be an amalgamation of at least 
two poeims, one with the setting of summer, the 
other with the setting of winter. 

It is manifestly difficult to assign such poetry 
to definite months or seasons, yet the Odyssey 
does presuppose a background in the seasons of 
the year. Of this there are several indefinite indi- 
cations and one that is supposedly definite. 

The definite indication is as follows: When 
Odysseus (e 272) went from the presence of 
Calypso and sailed toward the land of the Phaea- 
cians, he guided his course by the Pleiades, the 
late-setting Bootes, and the Bear. The Bear is 
visible every night of the year, so that its presence 
gives no indication of the season. The Pleiades 
and Bootes, however, are changeable, hence the 
fact that they were both visible should give a 
rough notion of the time of the year. The Ger- 
man scholars named above said that this reference 
could be to the winter season only, since, they 
argued, it was not until late autumn that the 
Pleiades and Bootes could both be seen at the 
same time. 

Professor Fox, director of the Dearborn Astro- 
nomical Observatory, has very kindly figured for 




108 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

me the exact position of these stars from 900 to 
700 B.C. His figures are for latitude 39*" N. 
This is the latitude of Smyrna, the assumed home 
of Homer, and the approximate latitude of Cor- 
cyra, the conjectural home of the Phaeacians. 
\ Since Odysseus sailed, keeping these stars on his 
left, that is, in an easterly direction, we may pre- 
sume that that latitude would not be amiss for 
the home of Calypso, as well as for that of Homer, 
Alcinous, and Odysseus. 

Professor Fox's conclusions are as follows: 

After allowing for the precession of the equinoxes 
it is found that in 800 b.o. the Pleiades were visible in 
lat. 39^ N. from dusk to dawn, that is all night, from 
September 1 to November 2; also that Arcturus, the 
essential star in the constellation Bootes, set during the 
hours of daylight, except during the period extending 
from June 15 to October 21. If a sailor saw during the 
same night the Pleiades and the setting of Bootes, the 
earliest date must have been September 1, the latest 
October 21. The change in season of these stars since 
800 B.C., because of the precession of the equinoxes, is 
about thirty-one days, so that these conditions would 
now fall about one month later in lat. 39^ N., with a 
corresponding lengthening of the period as the observer 
moves north. 

If it was the setting of Bootes which attracted 
the hero's attention, and if this setting could not 
be seen later than October 21, then it is impossible 
to assign this voyage to a later season in the 
year, and the cool assumption that these stars 
demanded the late autumn is thus absolutely 
false. How did such an error arise T Here again 



ANTIQUITIES AND KINDRED MATTERS 109 

my astronomical friend gave me complete satis- 
faction. Owing to the precession of the equi- 
noxes, the constellations are delayed about a day 
per century; also the farther north one goes, 
the later these northern constellations sink from 
view, so that in Berlin the setting of Bootes may 
now be seen as late as the twenty-fifth of Novem- 
ber, and the rising of the Pleiades has grown 
correspondingly later. Finsler and Wilamowitz 
assumed that Odysseus was a contemporary sail- 
ing in the latitude of Berlin 1 The statement, 
then, that the movements of Odysseus must fall 
in the late autumn is absolutely false. 

No better is the other assertion that the jour- 
ney of Telemachus demands the heat of summer. 
The trip made by Telemachus was from Ithaca 
to Pylos and on to Sparta. Ithaca lies south of 
lat. 39*" N. and is thus about 150 miles south of 
Naples, and the climate differs but little from 
that of the nearby Corfu. Baedeker, in his 
Greece, 252, says of the climate of Corfu: **The 
temperature is mild in October and the first half 
of November, but June, July, August and (often) 
September are very hot. ' ^ The last week of Sep- 
tember, to which I assign this journey, would be 
just the season when the heat of summer has 
begun to yield to the coolness of autumn. There 
is but one reference in regard to the temperature 
in the first book of the Odyssey (443), where it 
is said the young man slept covered with wool. 
The fact that he was thus covered shows that we 



UO THE UNITY OF HOMER 

are not dealii^ with the heat of snimner, bnt with 
the coolness of early antuinn. From Ithaca he 
went to Pylos, which is supposed to have been 
on or near the site of the modem Navarino, the 
climate of which is thns described by Mr. Grundy 
in his well-known book. The Great Persian War, 
VIII:" During the four weeks I spent at Navarino 
the thermometer never fell below 93° Fahrenheit, 
night or day, and rose to 110" or 112° in the abso- 
lute darkness of a closed house at midday." In 
the evening, when Telemachns started to go to his 
ship, as if to spend the night there, Nestor was 
highly indignant, protesting that he had suf- 
ficient coverings to keep not only his family, but 
his gnests warm and snug. If the weather were 
the summer weather described by Mr. Grundy, 
then these words about a bountiful supply of 
coverlets were intended as a piece of dry humor, 
a quality alien to the character of Nestor. When 
Telemachns and his companion started on their 
trip to Spartii, they whipped their horses, and 
their horses were so eager to go that they did not 
rest at any period of the day, but kept right on. 
During the long, hot days of summer they could 
not have traveled all day, bnt must have rested 
during the heat of noon, and limited their going 
to the eool hours, if there were any cool hours, 
of the morning and evening. These verses (y 
484 £f.) show that the theory of these critics was 
not founded on the Odyssey, but was an indepen- 
dent conjecture, which ignored not only the more 




ANTIQUITIES AND KINDRED MATTERS 111 

difficult facts of astronomy but the easily ascer- 
tainable statements of the poem.^ 

In the second. half of the last century skepti- 
cism had full control of all phases of Homer, so 
that not only the poet had been eliminated but his 
Troy also had been relegated to the realm of the 
impossible. Homer described that city as near 
the sea, on a low hill, close to two rivers. From 
this city Mount Ida could be seen in one direction 
and the island, Samothrace, in the other. Hardly 
more than fifty years ago it was agreed that no 
such city had existed near the shore, that it was 
impossible for any magnificent civilization to have 
arisen in that early day in the Troad, and that 
the bulk of the Iliad was the magnified tradition 
of a stronghold on a spur of Mount Ida, far from 
the Dardanelles. Thus, practically ignoring the 
Iliad, it was believed that the '* mighty Ilium 
rising from the plain,'* was only the confused 
picture of an unimposing fortress back among the 
hills. This belief was so thoroughly established 
that in practically all the classical atlases, except 
the very recent, Troy is marked on the maps as 
definitely located on this un-Homeric site, the 
modem village of Bunarbaschi. 

At the period of the greatest Homeric agnos- 
ticism a German merchant, Heinrich Schliemann, 
who had accumulated a fortune by the time he had 
reached early middle life, took up the study of 
Greek in order that he might read Homer in the 

fAsnimed ContradietioiiB in tlie Seasons of the Odyssey/' 
CUuM. PhfU. XI, 148. 



112 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

poet'B own language. He not only read Homer 
but committed much of him to memory as well, 
and in his enthusiasm visited the plain of Troy. 
He was utterly regardless and perhaps ignorant 
of the arguments of the critios and started to 
search for the site of the old city, using Homer 
for his guide in the safe confidence with which a 
mariner turns to his compass and his charts. In 
the face of the united ridicule of the learned clas- 
sical world, and in spite of difficulties apparently 
unsurmountable, he found a city on the very spot 
where Homer had placed it and just such a city 
as Homer had described. Never has simple faith 
been better justified and better rewarded. Few 
of his original critics were convinced, but they are 
all dead and their writings have joined in their 
fate. I am familiar with the name of no scholar, 
under seventy years of age, who doubts that 
Schliemann has discovered the ruins of the very 
city whose fate inspired the poetry of Homer. 
Schliemann was aided in finding the site of Troy 
by Frank Calvert, consular representative of 
Great Britain and the United States at the Dar- 
danelles, who had already started to excavate at 
Hissarlik when Schliemann was searching else- 
where. 

Doctor Walter Leaf in his edition of the Iliad 
was one of the most eager followers of the doc- 
trines of destructive criticism and believed that 
the topographical contradictions in r^ard to the 
Troad made the unity of the Iliad impossible. 



ANTIQUITIES AND KINDRED MATTERS 113 

In his note to E 355 he wrote : * * However it has 
been shown by Hercher that it is impossible to 
reconcile Homeric geognE'aphical statements with 
themselves or with each other/' He wrote that 
sentence at a time when he trusted the opinions 
of others. Later he visited Troy and studied the 
ruins and the topography of all that district with 
a thoroughness rarely equaled, comparing each 
part of the city and of the plain with the words 
of the poem. After this careful and independent 
investigation on the spot and with Homer in his 
hand he wrote: ^^One thing at least has passed 
from me beyond all doubt ; the poet has put into 
living words a tradition founded on real fighting 
in this very place/' . • . . **It is a remarkable 
fact that, so far as I can judge, no case of local 
inconsistency, not a single anatopism, can be 
brought home to the Iliad. ' '* 

The second book of the Hiad closes with two 
catalogues, first a fairly full catalogue of the 
Greeks, then a very meager catalogue of the 
Trojans. This Trojan Catalogue is perhaps the 
least esteemed part of Homer. Doctor Leaf, in 
his Iliad, said of it : ^ ^ The Catalogue of the Tro- 
jans differs notably from that of the Greeks in 
the evident want of detailed knowledge of the 
countries with which it deals.'' When he had 
visited the regions from which the Trojans and 
their allies had come, however, he wrote thus: 
**The Trojan Catalogue, in particular, seems to 
represent accurately a state of things which must 

s Troy, A Study in Somerio Oeography, 169, 12. 



114 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

have existed at the time of the Trojan War, and 
could not have existed after it, nor for long be- 
fore'* (p. 13); "The result of my journey was 
to confirm the view that the Troad, so far as it 
is described in the Iliad, is described from true 
historical knowledge, and that so much of the 
Trojan Catalogue as deals with the kingdom of 
Priam may be taken as an authentic historical 
document: a conclusion which I do not hesitate 
to extend to the larger part which tells of the 
Trojan allies'' (p. 6). These words were written 
by the man who had done more than any other 
man in England to spread the separatists' doc- 
trines, but written when he had turned his eyes 
from the critics and looked at things as they are. 

Arguments from language are settled neither 
by presumptions nor by reasonings, but solely by 
a study of the poems themselves, and Doctor 
Leaf's investigation on the spot seems conclusive 
to me, especially as he went to Troy after he had 
already published his belief in the topographical 
ignorance of Homer. 

The vanity of all other methods is shown in 
the fact that Robert* argues that the location of 
the city of Troy was accurately given only in the 
oldest parts of the Iliad, yet Wilamowitz with 
equal . assurance and with similar logic asserts 
that the location of Ilium was unknown in the 
oldest parts of the Iliad, and any accurate topo- 
graphical indication is a sure mark of lateness: 

• "Topographiscbe Probleme der Ilias/' Bermes XLII, 78. 



ANTIQUITIES AND KINDRED MATTERS 115 

*'The poet of the Iliad had absolutely no concep- 
tion of the location of the city of Troy.*'* Yet 
Schliemann and Calvert took that same Iliad and 
with it as their sole guide found Troy, and Doctor 
Leafy an avowed skeptic, when he read that Iliad 
in the plains of Troy and studied the ruins, re- 
nounced his doubts. 

The leader of the Greeks was given as Aga- 
memnon from Mycenae. Mycenae was situated 
on the edge of a rugged plain in the lower foot- 
hills, a good day's march from Corinth. In his- 
tory it appears only as a miserable little village, 
able to furnish but eighty men to meet the invad- 
ing army of Xerxes; and Mycenae and Tiryns, 
with the adjoining districts, could provide but 
four hundred troops for the great struggle at 
Plataea. How feeble their combined strength 
then was is shown by the fact that Phlius fur- 
nished for that one battle a full thousand men and 
Sicyon three thousand. Homer pictured Mycenae 
as **rich in gold," ** well-built," the center of a 
vast empire whose ruler could muster an army 
of over one hundred thousand men, who controlled 
twelve hundred ships, and who was so firmly 
established in his power that he could hold this 
army together in a foreign field without a decisive 
victory. 

Mycenae is hardly mentioned in any history 
of fifty years ago, as it was not imagined that 
such a city as that pictured in Homer had ever 

« Die Iliai tmd Bomer, 333. 



116 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

existed, and the whole story was hardly deemed 
worthy of a denial. There was also a vagae 
tradition that Agamemnon and others of his 
family had been buried there. Schliemanny with 
his wonderful capacity for accepting as true any 
essential statement in Homer, began excavations 
in Mycenae. He chanced to begin digging in just 
the right spot and soon found gravestones, then 
the graves themselves. In these graves were 
skeletons literally buried in gold, crowns, scepters, 
bracelets, plates, and jars ; some of these weighing 
sixty ounces of solid g^ld. In one of these graves 
were found seven hundred discs of gold and 
twenty-four enormous breastpins; in another 
were many artistic swords of bronze and gold. 
The faces of some of the dead were portrayed by 
golden masks. Evidently Homer was not far 
wrong when he described Mycenae as '^rich in 
gold ' ' and when he made it the center of a great 
and wealthy empire. 

The walls and the general culture of Troy and 
Mycenae so closely correspond that there is no 
doubt that they were flourishing at the same 
period, a period which has been named the Myce- 
naean Age. It was this age which furnished the 
background for the Homeric poems, and the civi- 
lization pictured by Homer roughly agrees with 
the civilization recorded on the monuments and 
the discoveries connected with the end of the 
Mycenaean period. Back of this Mycenaean Age 
is an earlier powerful civilization centering in 



ANTIQUITIES AND KINDRED MATTERS 117 

Crete, but the Homeric picture is of the Myce- 
naean civilization near the period of its collapse, 
about 1100 B.C. 

Many verses which were supposed by the 
critics to represent customs arising later than 
Homer are now seen to describe things known in 
the Mycenaean Age. In K 173 a razor is men- 
tioned, the only reference to this instrument in 
Homer. This was therefore seized upon as a sure 
proof of the lateness of this book, for the use of 
razors was assumed to be comparatively late ; but 
a razor has been f oimd in a grave in Mycenae, 
proving that razors were in use long before 
Homer. The Iliad and the Odyssey have but a 
single reference to slings {N 600) and once a ref- 
erence is made to '^the well-twisted threads from 
the fleece of the sheep'* (N 716), where a sling 
is probably meant. These two passages have been 
ruthlessly removed as later additions, but a frag- 
ment of a silver vase found in Mycenae represents 
a group of slingers near a wall hurling missiles 
at a besieging foe. 

An attempt was made to divide the books of 
Homer on the basis of the armor, since it was 
assumed that in the oldest portions the warrior 
used only a great shield which protected the entire 
body. It was argued that this great shield so 
completely shielded the body that no other pro- 
tecting armor was necessary, hence all references 
to coats of mail or cuirasses were to be regarded 
as later additions. It was on the basis of the 



118 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

armor that Robert tried to reconstruct his orig- 
inal niad, rejecting all verses or scenes which 
referred to small shields or coats of mail. 

No such uniformity of armor ever existed 
among the Greeks, and in the Mycenaean repre- 
sentations of huntsmen and warriors the varia- 
tions in styles of armor are quite as great as in 
the verses of Homer. In the famous Warrior 
Vase the soldiers all have small shields extending 
only from the shoulder to the hip, and they seem 
to have a protection for their body much like a 
coat of mail.° In the inlaid dagger blade the 
shields cover the entire body,* and in the silver 
fragment, which represents the slingers, the 
shields seem to extend to just below the hip. In 
an early Cretan seal the warrior clearly has a 
protection under his shield, that is, he depends on 
both the shield and the coat of mail.' All these 
various representations of armor found in early 
monuments show that the descriptions of armor 
y.in Homer are no more varied than the armor 
pictured from life. 

The assumed difficulties and contradictions in 
the descriptions of Homeric palaces have all been 
cleared up and harmony found by the recovery 
of the actual foundations of just such palaces.^ 
No test by which it has been sought to separate 
the Hiad and the Odyssey or any part of either 

B Fowler and Wheeler, CrreeJc Archaeology, 90. 
^Idern, 77. 

^Anthropology and the CUuHcb, 57. 

^Bassett, "The Palace of OdjBaeoBf" Atfi, Jowr. of AroK- 
aeology, 1919, 288 ff. 



ANTIQUITIES AND KINDRED MATTERS 119 

poem has found confirmation or support in the 
finds made at any of the numerous Mycenaean 
sites. 

Professor Seymour, although he did not be- 
lieve in Homeric unity, could find no evidence for 
his want of faith when he considered the life and 
civilization portrayed in these two poems. In his 
Life in the Homeric Age he wrote (p. 13) : ** As 
regards these questions we are obliged to regard 
the Homeric poems as units. The evidence for 
the later date of the Odyssey as yet is philological, 
not archaeological." This was written in 1907, 
just before tests of the accuracy of these philo- 
logical arguments had begun to be made. We 
know now that the philological evidences on which 
he based his belief have been totally discredited. 

Modem separatists have laid great stress on 
the fact that the Odyssey shows a marked ad- 
vance in the notions of piety and holiness, and 
in the words expressing these ideas. This is no 
proof for diverse authorship. Shakespeare in his 
earlier plays never uses the word ** pious,*' 
though in Hamlet and subsequent plays that 
word is found no less than eleven times.* We may 
say of any passage of poetry that such a word 
or idea was used, but we cannot assume that the 
idea omitted or left unsaid was not known. 

The poet of the Odyssey mentions the palm 
tree, the poet of the Iliad does not, but we cannot 
argue that this tree became known to the Greeks 

• Professor Bradley, quoted by Miss StaweU, Honner and the 
Iliad, 108. 



120 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

in the interval between the creation of the two 
poems. The Iliad mentions the grasshopper, 
cranes, eels, maggots, swans, sparrows, sparlings, 
the ass, and many other forms of common animal 
life which are not named in the Odyssey, yet must 
have been known to the author of that poem. 

The Iliad has roughly 1500 words which are 
not found in the Odyssey but which must have 
been perfectly familiar to educated people at the 
time the Odyssey was composed. We can argue 
absolutely nothing from the silences of the poem, 
unless we have some external proof that what is 
not mentioned is also not known. It is a strange 
and a most remarkable fact that Homer never de- 
scribes the setting of a ring nor carved stones, 
although nothing in the art of the age he is por- 
traying is more characteristic or shows greater 
skill than the carving of these settings. 

The fact that Homer wrote poetry as poetry, 
not as history, not as theology, and not as arch- 
aeology, makes it impossible to do more than 
roughly outline the life and the civilization of his 
actors. The Mycenaean finds help to fill in some 
of that outline but most of it remains a blank. 
We must exercise great caution in drawing 
arguments from silence or from the comparative 
frequency with which words are used. We know, 
for example, that Emerson was not acquainted 
with the kodak, not because he does not use that 
word, but because we have independent evidence 
that both the instrument and the word came into 



ANTIQUITIES AND KINDRED MATTERS 121 

being after his time, but we are not justified in 
drawing a like conclusion if the word is not found 
in the writings of Stephen Phillips or Alfred 
Noyes. Homeric silences similarly, when unsup- 
ported by external evidence, furnish no proof of 
the poet's choice or of his knowledge. We must 
know from some outside source that Homer was 
ignorant of the things he did not mention before 
we can draw any important conclusions there- 
from. 

In the sixth book of the Iliad, 303, the women 
of Troy try to win the favor of Athena by making 
her an offering of a splendid garment. Doctor 
Leaf describes this image of Athena as ^^a rude 
wooden imag^ such as survived in many temples 
into historic times." But the critics have seen 
in this image a mark not of rude antiquity but 
of polished lateness, and Bethe uses this verse 
with confident enthusiasm to prove^® that the Iliad 
could not have come into being until the sixth 
century b.c. He assumes that Homer was describ- 
ing a seated statue of Athena of life size, and he 
argues that these large statues, these life-sized 
images of the gods, were not created before the 
sixth century ; therefore the scene in the Iliad with 
its great seated image of Athena could not have 
been created before the time of Solon. There 
is nothing, however, but Bethe 's fancy to prove 
that this image was large. Homer makes no 
reference to its size; all he says is ^AOripmln^ iwl 

10 New Jdhrbuoher /. d. dl. TMU, 1919, 1-16. 



122 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

yovpaai. There is no reason for regarding the 
image of Athena as life size, and but little for 
regarding it as seated. The noun ^^ knees" and 
the verb **take by the knees'' are constantly used 
by Homer in a figurative sense. In A 130 Aga- 
memnon overtook the sons of Antimachus, both 
in one chariot, who, when they saw they could 
not escape, took him by the knees, yowa^^a-drfv^ 
begging for their lives. It would have been im- 
possible for two men standing in a smaU chariot 
to clasp the knees of a man standing on the 
ground, hence the verb must have been used in 
a figurative sense. The common phrase, ^^ these 
things lie on the knees of the gods," 0€&p iv 
yovvaai Keirai^ could hardly be forced to mean that 
all the gods were conceived as always remaining 
seated. It was simply used to mean, ** These 
things are now out of our control and are in the 
keeping of the gods. ' ' This is all the phrase need 
mean in regard to the image of Athena, and the 
verse is best translated, **The robe was given 
over to the keeping of the goddess." We know 
from Strabo xin, 601, that in historical times the 
image of Athena in her temple in Troy was a 
standing image; also the ancient coins from the 
vicinity of Ilium have many representations of 
Athena; but, so far as those coins have been re- 
produced in the exhaustive work of von Fritze,** 
not one represents the goddess as seated. The 
testimony of Strabo, the coins, and the conserva- 
tism in cult matters, aU unite in proving that in 

11 Appendix to Dorpfeld's Troja und Ilum, 



ANTIQUITIES AND KINDRED MATTERS 123 

Homer the goddess was not pictured as seated. 
Bethe's whole argument for the lateness of the 
Iliad rests on the assumption that life-sized and 
seated statues of the gods were first seen in 
Greece about 600 b.c, and that in Homer we have 
the description of such a statue; hence the pass- 
age must be at least as late as the sixth century. 
The argument has two serious defects: first, 
Homer does not give the slightest indication that 
the image was life-sized — ^that is pure presump- 
tion — and, second, the evidence clearly shows that 
the image was not seated.^' 

Perhaps no more convincing argument for the 
late date of certain portions of the Odyssey has 
been advanced than the argument in regard to 
the Sicels. The Iliad has no references to these 
western lands and their inhabitants, and it has 
been supposed that references in the Odyssey 
must belong to a time later than Greek coloniza- 
tion in southern Italy and Sicily. The argument 
is so simple that it is given in the handbooks as 
a fact, e.g. in Christ-Schmid. 

We know when the first Greek settlements 
were made in Sicily ; hence the critics had a defi- 
nite date and could show that these references 
could not be earlier than the middle of the eighth 
century. However Signor Orsi has recently car- 
ried on excavations in these regions and has 
found that the inhabitants of Bruttium had the 
same stage and style of civilization as the Sicels 

12 An excellent diseuBflion of Bethe 'b theory ie given by Dremp, 
Berliner phU, WodheMchrift, 1919, noe. 51 and 52. 



124 THE UNITY OP HOMBE 

in Sicily. Moreover, what is of the very greatest 

importance, he found fragments of many sorts 

of undoubted Greek vases, fragments antedating 

\ by many centuries the oldest Greek settlements 

in the west, and thus proved that long before the 

settlers came to Italy and Sicily, Greek traders 

^ and sailors were familiar with these very regions, 

^^ • \jf^ where they traded the artistic and useful wares 

> of the Greeks for the copper and raw materials 

r^y^ of the lands lying in the central basin of the 

i Mediterranean/* It should not have been left to 

the discoveries of Signer Orsi to show that a civi- 
. Hzation such as the Mycenaean could not have 
remained ignorant of these nearby lands. 

It has often been observed that the Iliad has 
far more similes than the Odyssey, the ratio being 
approximately four to one, and this has been 
believed to prove that the poet of the Odyssey 
was decidedly inferior to the poet of the Iliad in 
this creative and visualizing power.** However, 
the reason for this disparity is evident. The Iliad 
has a theme most difficult to enliven and to 
diversify, and the constant repetition of battles 
and of single combats would be tedious in the 
extreme were the story not told with a wealth of 
poetic adornment. But the varied events of the 
Odyssey need no such embellishment, just as in 
the Iliad, when there is variety of theme or of 
action sufficient to grip for its own sake, there are 
few or no similes. The first book of that poem has 

i« Oldf ather, CUu9. Weekly, VIII, 66. 
liFinsler, Homer, 1, 328 ff. 



ANTIQUITIES AND KINDBBD MATTERS 125 



\ 



rapid and changing action, but it has no elaborate 
simile; while the second book, with the marshall- \ 

ing of the troops, abounds in similes. No one 
could argue that B shows higher poetic powers 
than the preceding book. In neither the Iliad 
nor the Odyssey are the similes used for their 
own sake, or for adornment, but only to hold or 
direct the attention of the hearer. A telling proof 
that the difference is due to the theme and not 
to the author is found in the fact that in Vergil 
the books of travel and of adventure have but few 
similes, while the fighting scenes have relatively 
many. Book m, which is largely Odyssean in . 
content, has only one simile, and book xn, the book 
most resembling the fighting scenes of the Iliad, 
has eighteen similes; hence in this poem of un- 
doubted unity we find that those parts which most 
nearly correspond with the story of the Odyssey 
have few similes, while those most resembling the 
action of the Iliad have them in abundance." We 
cannot deny unity to Homer on the basis of poetic 
qualities which are not questioned in Vergil. 

The similes of the Iliad and the Odyssey show 
exactly the same traits, the same partiality for 
the external world, the world one sees, rather 
than for comparisons drawn from the reahn of 
the mind. Each poem has but one simile based 
on the mental world, and in each the speed of 
thought is the occasion of the comparison. Each 
poem shows the same enthusiasm and admiration 

IB StatistieB for Vergil are given hy Thomson, De comparor 
iionibiu VergUiania. See Clas8. Jour., XIII, 687. 




126 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

for lions. Oddly enough this trait was shared 
by the artist who created the famous dagger blade 
discovered in Mycenae, for on each side of that 
blade is a lion scene. The poet in each poem 
shows the same willingness to cling to and to 
expand the simile after its purpose has been ful- 
filled, for example (T 2) : The noise with which 
the Trojans advanced is compared with the cry 
of birds, then he adds, **like the cry of cranes far 
ahead in the heavens, which flying from winter and 
the heavy storm, move with clangor toward the 
streams of the ocean bearing death and destruc- 
tion to pygmy men, and early in the morning they 
begin the baneful struggle.*' Here the pleasure 
the poet felt in the cranes leads him away from his 
story to a detailed description of the object with 
which he illustrated his narrative. Exactly the 
same poetic detachment is found in the Odyssey 
(t 205) : When the disguised Odysseus calmly 
told Penelope that he had seen her husband, * * she 
melted to tears like the melting snow, snow on 
the top of a lofty mountain, after the west wind 
has caused it to fall, and then as it melts the rivers 
run full to the sea, ' ' Here we almost forget Pene- 
lope in thinking of the snow, how it came, how 
it melts, and how it finds its way to the rivers. 
Such similes abound in each poem. 

Both poems add to the eflFectiveness of the 
similes by an occasional touch of human interest. 
In the Iliad (0 559) the poet compares the camp- 
fires in the plain of Troy and their beauty to a 



ANTIQUITIES AND KINDRED MATTERS 127 

night '^when in the heaven the stars shine round 
the clear full moon, when all the air is still, and 
every cliff and headland towers distinct, and all 
the stars are seen, and a shepherd rejoices in his 
heart. ' ^ It was not enough for the poet to picture 
this scene of beauty, there must be some one to 
see it and to rejoice in it, even if that person be 
only a shepherd. In the Odyssey (x 302) the poet 
thus describes Odysseus and those who helped 
him in the slaughter of the suitors : 

And they like unto strong-taloned, hook-beaked vul- 
tures when swooping down from the mountains they rush 
at smaller birds, birds which fly close to the earth in 
terror, and the vultures darting at them destroy them, 
for they can neither defend themselves nor escape, and 
men gaze at the sport with delight. 

Finally the comparison of the slow withdrawal 
of Ajax from superior foes with the slow move- 
ments of a sluggish ass which little children are 
attempting to drive from a field of grain seems 
to be the conception of the same poet who likened 
the restlessness of Odysseus to the activity of a 
sausage which a man constantly whirls and turns . -» 

over a heavy fire and the sausage is kept from x^.*" . 

burning solely by the speed with which it is 
turned. Indeed the similes of the two poems show 
such a similarity and variety, such a wealth of the 
powers of observation, and such an ability to seize 
on the essential and striking features of the 
objects compared that they could hardly have 
originated except in the resourceful brain of the 
same creative genius. 






/ 



128 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

The separatist argument that the bards are 
more often in evidence in the Odyssey than in the 
Iliad is easily explained by the fact that in the 
Odyssey the bards are to be found at the palace 
of some great king, such as Odysseus, Agamem- 
non, or Alcinous, but in the Iliad the Greeks are 
in camp and there is little place or occasion for 
the presence of the bard. Bards were known to 
the poet of the Iliad, as is shown by the mention 
of Thamyris, who lost his sight boasting that he 
could excel even the Muses in song. 

The bards are not introduced into the Odyssey 
for their own sake or for their songs. They are the 
means by which the poet solved his greatest and 
most diflScult problem. The story of the Iliad is 
not complex, therefore the poet is not obliged 
for the sake of the actors in the poem to repeat 
what is already known to his own audience; the 
action of the Iliad has the same audience and the 
same general background throughout. The story 
of the Iliad furnishes its own interpretation, but 
in the Odyssey the case is far different. In 
that poem three distinct groups of hearers are to 
be considered : the poet 's own audience, the people 
of Ithaca, and the Phaeacians who were the people 
of Alcinous. The method by which Homer met 
this difficulty is one of the greatest proofs of his 
genius. He wished to repeat little or nothing 
already known, yet he must keep each of these 
three groups informed without retelling what 
was already known to the others. He could 



ANTIQUITIES AND KINDRED MATTERS 129 

assnme that his own andienoe was aoquainted with 
the story of the Iliad and the traditions which lay 
around it, hence knew of Odysseus; but he could 
not assume that an audience in Ithaca had any 
clear ideas in regard to the events connected with 
the war at Troy; yet he could not repeat for the 
sake of the Ithacans a story already known to 
his own, the poet's, hearers. This difficulty was 
overcome by the creation of the bard and having 
him sing a few snatches from Trojan themes, thus 
creating the impression that the general outlines 
of the tale were already well-known and therefore 
need not be repeated. The fact that the bard, 
Phemius, was not allowed to sing his song, aud 
that we have only a brief summary, * * and he sang 
of the baleful return of the Achaeans, which Pallas 
Athena had brought upon them in their departure 
from Troy'' shows that the bard was not intro- 
duced for the sake of his song, but to help out a 
bit of poetic mechanism. Aifter we have listened 
to these few words from Phemius we know that 
the story of Troy is familiar to the poet's own 
hearers and to the men of Ithaca, but there still 
remains a third audience, the people of Alcinous, 
which must also be kept informed. It was neces- 
sary, too, that this third audience should be inter- 
ested in the hero and eager to hear from his own 
lips the story of his wandering, for without that 
interest his long tale could not be told. Nothing 
related in the earlier books has been told to this 
audience of the Phaeacians, so that the poet must 



130 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

start in afresh to win the interest of a new group 
of hearers. That not a single device for arousing 
the interest either of the poet's own audience or 
of the people of Ithaca is repeated before this 
third audience is proof of Homer's wonderful 
resourcefulness. When the hero came into the 
presence of the Phaeacians he at first hid his 
identity, since he had no reason to believe that 
they had any interest in Odysseus, But when he 
showed that wonderful skill in the athletic con- 
tests they were interested in him for his own sake, 
whoever he might prove to be. The bard then 
repeatedly sang a few snatches about the glories 
of Odysseus and his exploits at Troy, so that we 
know they were interested in Odysseus, wherever 
he might be, and the athlete's glory, won by an 
unnamed stranger, easily merges into that of the 
hero. It was only by withholding the name of 
Odysseus, when Arete asked him his name, that 
the poet could show to Odysseus how great was 
his heroic renown in the land of the Phaeacians, 
and it was only by the glory he had won as a 
nameless victor that the Phaeacians could accept 
without questioniDg and at once this unknown 
stranger as the illustrious Odysseus, whose praises 
the bard had just been singing. 

No audience not aroused to enthusiasm by 
what Odysseus had done and by the songs it had 
heard would have listened to the long story of 
his wanderings. The real purpose of the games 
and the songs was to create this enthusiasm. 



ANTIQUITIES AND KINDRED MATTERS 131 

Strange as it may seem the starting point for the 
destructive criticism of the Odyssey carried on 
by Kirchhoff and all his school lies in the fact that 
when Arete, the queen of the Phaeacians, asked 
Odysseus his name, he evaded the answer. Had 
he replied at once, **I am Odysseus,'' she might 
have asked, **Who is Odysseus! I never heard 
of him before." This would have been an em- 
barrassing position for a great hero. If she had 
known of the fame of Odysseus, she might have 
said, **You have no marks of that hero, and I 
know you are not, since you came here dressed 
in the clothing I made myself. ' ' This would have 
killed the Odyssey right at the start, yet it is just 
such poetic absurdity that these great critics 
demanded of the poet. Homer builded far better. 
When Odysseus arose to speak and to tell his 
name, he knew that the story of Troy and his own 
exploits were well known to his hearers, for twice 
the bard had sung of them; not much indeed, 
but just enough to show how familiar they were 
with Odysseus and with Trojan traditions. He 
knows, as he rises, the enthusiasm they have for 
him because of the athletic skill which he has just 
displayed, he knows their enthusiasm for the 
heroic Odysseus, and he also knows that their 
acquaintance with Trojan tales has freed him 
from the necessity of repeating for their sake a 
story already known to the poet's own audience. 
Odysseus can thus begin the narrative of his 
wanderings with the words, **The wind bearing 



132 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

me from Ilinm brought me to the land of the 
GiconeSy" and he feels no necessity to make a 
single reference to the exploits at Troy, 

The songs of Demodocus thns served a double 
purpose: they showed that Odysseus would find 
an audience eager to listen and, of equal impor- 
tance, they made it possible for him to take for 
granted a knowledge of the tale of Troy and per- 
mitted biTn to begin the story of his own wander- 
ings without a hint of what had happened there. 

Just before Odysseus left the Phaeacians to 
start for Ithaca Demodocus sang again, but there 
is no hint as to the theme of his song. AU that 
the poet tells us is: ''And among them sang the 
divine bard, Demodocus, honored by the people." 
There was no longer any need to introduce any- 
one or to relieve the poet from the burden of 
repeating a familiar tale, hence the unremem- 
bered song. 

Phemius did a like service in Ithaca. In the 
first book his brief song of the fate of the 
Achaeans shows that here the story of Troy needs 
no retelling. Hence even Odysseus on his return, 
although he told his wife of his wanderings and 
adventures, never mentioned the fact that he had 
been at Troy nor narrated a single event that had 
happened there. Each bard created by his songs 
the impression that Trojan tales were already 
known and the poet was thus saved from the 
necessity of repeating for the sake of the audi- 
ences in the poem a tale already familiar to his 
own hearers. 



ANTIQUITIES AND KINDRED MATTERS 138 

The various shrewd devices by which the poet 
overcame the necessity of repeating familiar tales 
have convinced me that the Iliad and the Odyssey 
are not repeating traditions already known, but 
that they, too, are new and original creations, not 
old material put into verse, but new material 
created for new poems. Without an Iliad there 
would have been but scant tradition in regard to 
the wrath of Achilles, and without an Odyssey 
there would have been scant tradition in regard 
to the return of Odysseus. 

No bard is allowed to finish his song, and we 
are given but a brief indication of the theme, 
except of the song by Demodocus telling of the 
love of Ares and Aphrodite. This song was quite 
apart from heroic traditions and was intended to 
represent a Phaeacian song, sung at their banquet 
to delight their leader and his people, as well 
as their guest, and to give some indication of 
the things which delighted that pleasure-loving, 
sensuous people. 

The failure to appreciate the fact that the 
bards were introduced as a poetic device and not ^ 
for their songs has caused all that immense and 
futile literature from Welcker to Finsler, which 
has tried to reconstruct the original poetry of 
Homer out of such songs as Phemius and Demo- 
docus are supposed to have sung. No necessity 
for the bards existed in the Iliad, hence they have 
no part in that poem. No one doubts that bards 
lived before the Iliad was created, so that the 



134 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

failure of the poet to make use of them must have 
been from choice and not from ignorance. They 
were a poetic necessity in the Odyssey, they were 
not in the Iliad, and their presence or absence is 
no test of authorship. 

There are no tests of language, customs, or 
civilization which show that the lUad and the 
Odyssey were not created in the same age. We 
must remember that a poet is to be measured by 
what he says, not by what he ojnits, and that even 
what he says is poetry. No one could reconstruct 
Milton's theology from his poetry, if that poetry 
were the only source of our knowledge. We 
should imagine that his gods were much like those 
of Homer, for each poet begins his poem with 
an appeal to the Muse. Hamlet might seem to 
belong to the age when men fought with bows and 
slings, for he speaks of ^^The slings and arrows 
of outrageous fortune,*' yet Marcellus in that 
same play asks, **Why such daily cast of brazen 
cannon!" 

In some places Milton's theology seems and 
is purely pagan, while in other places it is purely 
Christian; and Shakespeare in the same play 
refers to slings, arrows, and brazen cannon, each 
according to his own poetic fancy. Until we can 
prove that Homer in one passage failed to men- 
tion, because he did not know of it, something 
which he mentioned in some other passage, we 
cannot establish the existence of various cultural 
strata in Homeric poetry. 



ANTIQUITIES AND KINDRED MATTERS 135 

Homeric scholars are heavily in debt to the 
work of our great archaeologists, whose discov- 
eries have so completely demolished many of the 
most vaunted proofs of the disintegrators. Not 
a single discovery made at Troy, Tiryns, Mycenae, 
or elsewhere has vindicated one of all their many 
assertions. Without the great finds in the realm 
of Priam and of Agamemnon it would have been 
impossible to convince honest doubters of the his- 
torical reality of Troy or of the greatness of 
Mycenae, and to reestablish the belief that the 
Trojan War was something more than fancy. 
Had Schliemann accepted the universally tri- 
mnphant beliefs of his day and doubted the unity 
and reliability of the Iliad, Troy might never have 
been discovered, and lovers of Homer could hardly 
have dared to believe in Homeric unity. 

The archaeologists, men who deal with tan- 
gible objects, are as a rule Homeric unitarians. 
It is a great pleasure to quote the words of Wace, 
whose high standing is guaranteed by the fact 
that he has been for several years and still is the 
director of the British School of Archaeology at 
Athens. He wrote in a recent number of the 
Edinburgh Review (July, 1919) as follows: 

The Wolfian cloud still hangs over the study of 
Homer. It has had a blighting effect on Homeric study 
which otherwise, thanks to the advance of Archaeology, 

might have made surprising progress We must 

abandon the Wolfian theory and all it entails. The 
niad and the Odyssey were written down when com- 
jKXsed, and the text has not been substantially altered 



136 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

since. The longer we devote ourselves to the actual 
poems, the more shall we be refreshed, and the more 
will the faith in our creed be strengthened. 

This complete change of attitude on the part 
of unprejudiced investigators is due to the fact 
that a few years ago scholars wearied of their 
efforts to build a worthy structure out of the 
assumptions of the higher critics and in their 
weariness turned once more to the study of 
Homer. 



CHAPTER V 
THE CONTEADICTIONS 

Some of the arguments against Homeric unity 
already mentioned have been advanced by one 
group of critics, others by others; but there is 
one argument upon which all are agreed. They 
all agree that there are, in both poems, certain 
inconsistencies and contradictions, and that these 
are of such a nature as to make unity of plan and 
unity of authorship impossible. 

Inconsistencies like the following are cited: 
When Athena, in the guise of Mentor, and Tele- 
machus come to Pylos, they find a great gathering 
of the people assembled for a sacrifice. Soon, 
however, the people are forgotten, and what was 
a multitude becomes a little family group. Later 
when these same two travelers arrive at Sparta 
on the occasion of a great wedding feast, they find 
the palace so crowded that it seems impossible 
for others to be received. The wedding in turn 
is soon ignored and is replaced by a small domes- 
tic circle, where Helen is busy with her household 
cares. When it is time for the guests to retire, 
the bride, the groom, the entertainers, are all for- 
gotten. Telemachus declines an invitation to 
make a short visit, and yet tarries at least a 



138 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

month, with no explanation for the delay. The 
Oreeks before Troy at one time are protected by 
a moat and a wall ; at another, both defenses are 
ignored. Patrodus tells Nestor that he is in a 
great hurry and may not be seated, that Achilles 
is impatient, and, now that he has the information 
for which he came, he must return with speed to 
Achilles ; yet he does not return until after action 
which fills four books. Even then he forgets his 
errand and his message. After Diomede has 
wounded both Aphrodite and Ares, he shrinks 
from facing Glaucus, lest he prove to be a god, 
saying, * * I would not fight with a god. * ' Hector, 
after he has been for the most part a hero in flight, 
challenges the best of the Greeks to meet him in 
single combat. All seem afraid, yet they dare 
not refuse; and, oddly enough, no one refers to 
the duel fought on that very day by Paris and 
Menelaus, a duel which had proved a fiasco and 
the terms of which had been treacherously broken. 
These examples might be indefinitely extended. 
Nothing in Homeric criticism has been so simple, 
so easy as this. No scholar who has set out to 
gather Homeric inconsistencies has ever returned 
empty-handed, and when once a critic has acquired 
a taste for this sort of thing he soon convinces 
himself that Homer has little else than contra- 
dictions. All these are freely admitted, they are 
many, they are found throughout the Iliad and 
the Odyssey, and they cannot be removed without 
destroying the best of both poems. 



THE CONTRADICTIONS 139 

Fifty years ago most believers in Homeric 
unity defended that belief by the assumption that 
all these contradictions had been added to the 
poems by interpolators. They believed that by 
removing these suspected passages harmony and 
imity might be restored, an assumption that has 
led to the rejection of practically every verse in 
Homer. No one has ever given a satisfying expla- 
nation of the origin of these interpolations, or of 
their acceptance by bards and public. It may be 
easy to suppose that some prosaic and dull bard 
removed good verses and substituted inferior 
ones, but here the supposition ends. For there 
still remains the harder necessity of getting 
other bards to accept this change, and, harder 
still, the necessity of getting an intelligent audi- 
ence, already familiar with the better text, to 
accept this inferior poetry. 

This explanation, on the basis of the interpo- 
lation of inferior scenes, demands not only one 
inferior bard, but an inferior audience, and a like 
inferiority in all other bards. The creator of 
nonsense verses might have pride in his own pro- 
duction and not recognize his own stupidity. But 
how could he get his inferior version accepted? 

The contradiction is not removed by assuming 
a second poet, for that second poet would be most 
careful not to betray himself by any slips. The 
whole scheme of higher criticism involves the 
existence of a group of poets determined to give 
up their own individuality and to merge their own 



s 



140 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

work into that of another. They have so com- 
pletely mastered his language, his meter, his 
style, that their work cannot be detected. Yet 
they were so ignorant of the very writings they 
imitated and into which they were eager to merge 
their own efforts that they made, unconscionsly, 
these contradictions. Certainly the imitator would 
above everything strive not to betray himself by 
inconsistencies. But to the original genius, the 
creator, such things would be of no moment ; he 
has nothing to conceal and he need never fear that 
a slip may betray him. Even counterfeiters are 
detected by the very consistency with which they 
follow the writing of the names they forge. A 
recent expert has said that no man ever writes 
his own signature twice in exactly the same way, 
while the counterfeiter exactly repeats the signa- 
ture he is imitating/ These inconsistencies in 
Homer are proof that they come from an original 
genius, from one who is himself, and not from 
one who is following the style of another or who 
is interpolating his own into another's poetry. 
All these contradictions or shifts of poetic purpose 
may be explained on the theory of one creative 
genius, but are impossible of explanation on the 
assumption that different parts were added by 
servile imitators or followers. 

Homeric contradictions may be divided into 
three groups: actual contradictions, due to the 
lapse in the memory of the poet, those in which no 

1 Arthur S. Ghapman, American Magaeine, Maj, 1920. 



THE CONTRADICTIONS 141 

poetic plan or purpose can be detected; assumed 
contradictions, due solely to the failure of the 
critics properly to translate or to understand the 
simple meaning of the poet; and finally, incon- 
sistencies arising from the manner in which the 
poems were presented, that is, from a changed 
poetic purpose, or from the shifting point of view 
of the various actors in the poems. 

Actual contradictions in Homer are very few 
and these few of trifling importance. The list 
given by Mahaffy contains but one actual contra- 
diction, and that one is grossly misstated.* * * The 
fact that the same heroes are killed two or three 
times over may pass as unimportant." As a 
matter of fact not a single hero or person is slain 
twice or dies twice in Homer. The only slip of 
this sort in all Homer is found in the fact that 
Pylaemenes, a king of the Paphlagonians, was 
slain in E 576, and subsequently mourns the death 
of his son (N 658). Pylaemenes was purely a 
characterless figure in the Iliad, who took no 
part in the action and was introduced only to be 
slain. The poet, evidently forgetting that he had 
introduced such a person and had had him killed, 
in a later book mentions the death of a son of 
Pylaemenes and the mourning of the father. 
This petty ruler was of no importance in the poem 
alive or dead, so that it takes rather careful study 
to notice that the king who mourns had been slain 
eight books previously. This, as I have already 

9 History of Greek Literaiure, I, 83. 



142 THE UNITY OF HOMER 

said, is the only contradiction of the sort in either 
poem. 

A certain Schedins^ the son of Perimedes, was 
slain, as was another Schedius, the son of Iphitus. 
The fact that the name of the father was given in 
each case shows that there was no confusion. It 
was no easy matter for even a Greek to make a 
new name for each minor actor. Homer used the 
same name over and over, except for the leading 
actors; with the leading actors identity of name 
would have caused confusion. There were four 
Trojans and one Greek with the name Chromius, 
one Greek and two Trojans with the name Melan- 
ippus, and one Greek and two Trojans had the 
name Adrastus. There can be no doubt that the 
poet intended two persons by the name of 
Schedius, one the son of Iphitus, the other the son 
of Perimedes, so that the statement made by 
Mahaflfy that **the same heroes are killed two or 
three times over'' is an error. 

The contradiction in regard to Pylaejmenes, 
who was killed in the fifth book and mourns 
his son in the thirteenth, is a real contradiction. 
But no part of the plot depended on Pylaemenes ; 
neither his death nor his grief has any bearing 
on the story. No one could assume that the bards 
who committed the poems to memory failed to 
notice that the Pylaemenes who mourned the loss 
of a son had himself been slain a few books 
previously. The very fact that this contradiction 
was never removed is the best possible proof of 



THE CONTRADICTIONS 143 

the fidelity with which the Homeric text had^ 
been preserved. We may confidently assume that 
bards who could not or would not rectify this 
manifest error had neither the power nor the 
inclination to change the Homeric tradition. 

Such errors as the above abound in literatures 
where the author had the advantage of printing, 
proof reading, and all the modem methods for 
detecting mistakes. In the first edition of 
Thackeray's Newcomes one of the prominent 
characters dies, comes back to life, and calmly 
continues to act until the end of the story. Lowell 
ranks Don Quixote as one of the greatest achieve- 
ments of the world's literature. This work was 
printed and given to the public by the author 
himself, yet it contains such glaring contradic- 
tions that it seems impossible that they could have 
escaped the notice of the printer. The contra- 
diction in regard to Pylaemenes comes long after 
his death, so that one could hardly notice it, and 
Pylaemenes is too unimportant to give any weight 
to the contradiction. In Don Quixote, on the other 
hand, the contradictions are so open that the 
reader turns back only a page or two in order to 
make sure that he has not misread the text. The 
four leading actors in this great work of Cer- 
vantes are Don Quixote, his horse Rozinante, 
Sancho, and the ass. In chapter twenty-three 
Sancho's ass was stolen, to his infinite misery. 
Then the squire urged that they proceed, where- 
upon * * the knight led the way and Sancho followed 



144 THE UNITY OF HOMER 

his master sitting sideways on his ass." While 
thus sitting, Sancho complained, ^^The theft of 
my ass makes me but a sorry traveler on foot/^ 
Cervantes, in Part Two of his great work, poked 
fun at himself for this contradiction, but he did 
not think it worth while to rewrite the scene. 
Again, Sancho 's wife was, in one place, Maria, 
in another, Teresa. 

The literary canon that contradictions make 
Vunity of authorship impossible, a canon which was 
deified at the middle of the last century, is at 
such absolute variance with well-known facts that 
one can only wonder at the literary blindness 
which created it or accepted it. This canon is 
thus stated by Mahaffy:' ** Wherever there is a 
plain violation of logical consistency, we have not 
the work of a single poet telling his own story.*' 
Don Quixote suffices to show the futility of this 
rule. We must remember also that Don Quixote 
was not the work of a young and untried genius, 
but of a man nearing old age, who had tried many 
fields of literature and who had produced many 
great dramas. These contradictions, therefore, 
were not due to inexperience. Even an artist of 
the delicate workmanship of Vergil, in a single 
book of the Aeneid,^ described the wooden horse 
in one passage as made of fir, in another as made 
of maple, and in another as made of oak. 

Wood, writing in 1769, twenty-six years before 
Wolf's Prolegomena appeared, said: 

^Loo. eii. 

«n, 16, 113, «86. 



THE CONTRADICTIONS 145 

Cassandra had laid open to Andhises the destination 
of his family for Italy. It is pointed out to Aeneas in 
yarious manners, but most explicitly by the ghost of 
Creiisa, who not only informs him that he is to go to Italy, 
but describes the part of it where he is to reign. Yet 
in a few lines we see the Trojans embark, without know- 
ing where to go. Should we proceed to examine the 
whole action of the Aeneid in this manner, we might 
observe little inaccuracies of the same kind, which are 
not to be found so frequently in Homer." 

This evidence is of the greater weight from the 
fact that it comes from a competent observer at 
a time when there was no Homeric Question. He 
was trying to prove nothings simply stating his 
own observation that contradictions are not so 
frequent in Homer as in Vergil. Such contradic- 
tions abound in literary masterpieces of. un- 
doubted unity. In my opinion they are proof of, 
just the opposite of that which the critics assume, 
that is, they show that the creative genius has his 
mind and his eye fixed on the general plan, the 
leading idea, while the imitator could not see this ; 
he would notice the details, the workmanship. 

The second class of contradictions consists of 
those which result from the failure of the critics 
to translate or to understand the simple meaning 
of the poet. This class is almost unlimited in 
number and is a sad commentary on the ruthless 
manner in which Homer has been mutilated and 
ignored. The few following illustrations from the 
writings of the most famous scholars will suffice : 
Bergk began his Griechische Literaturgeschichte 

• Op. <fit,, p. 20. 



146 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

on a mammoth scale, devoting over one thousand 
pages to the early epic. This volume he lived to 
see published ; and as it was written by one of the 
most illustrious of Greek scholars, it should be 
the ideal of a literary history. Bergk, although 
a defender of Homeric unity, regarded entire 
scenes and books as interpolations and ruthlessly 
removed them. The contradictions furnished him 
his criteria for making most of his decisions. The 
following example may be selected as one on which 
he laid great stress : Amphinomus, one of the most 
kindly and gentle of the suitors, treated the beg- 
gar Odysseus with such tender consideration that 
Odysseus tried to warn him of his impending 
danger. But the warning was not heeded; he 
remained with the suitors and was slain. The 
poet tells us in advance that Amphinomus was 
not to escape the doom which Athena had pre- 
pared for him, for she had decreed that he was to 
die at the hands of Telemachus. Bergk found a 
great contradiction here and wrote : * * Later, when 
the suitors are slain, Amphinomus does not 
appear, a proof either of a poetic error or that 
the description of the death of the suitors has 
been changed in transmission,'* One wonders 
that when Bergk wrote this sentence he did not 
have sufficient curiosity to re-read the Homeric 
account of the slaughter of the suitors. If he 
had done so, he would have found eight verses 
wholly given to the description of the death of 
this very Amphinomus at the hands of Tele- 



THE CONTRADICTIONS 147 

machus. These eight verses are in every standard 
edition of the Odyssey; if Bergk had a copy of 
the Odyssey, they were in that copy. 

Bethe, because of an assumed contradiction, 
rejects as an interpolation the episode (A 194 ff.) 
in which the goddess Athena stops the attejmipt 
of Achilles to assanlt or murder the king:* '^It 
would be a tame climax for Achilles to throw his 
scepter to the ground after he had already flashed 
a sword in the face of the Greeks"; and again: 
**The throwing down of the scepter appears as a 
cheap anticlimax, since the sword has already 
flown from the scabbard.'' Yet the Greek to 
which he refers is the simplest that could be writ- 
ten; the verb is in the imperfect tense and can 
be translated only, ** While he was drawing the 
sword from its sheath. ' ' When Athena came she 
said to him, * * Draw not thy sword. ' ' She did not 
command him to return it to the scabbard, for 
the good reason that it had not yet been drawn. 
There is no anticlimax and no contradiction in 
Homer's account. Bethe's assumptions and the 
ponderous book he wrote rest on a mistaken trans- 
lation of a perfectly simple and a remarkably 
unambiguous sentence. 

Mahaffy selects as especially notable the fol- 
lowing contradiction:^ 

In the races of the twenty-third book Diomede con- 
tends with the horses he took from Aeneas in the fifth 
book, and no mention is made of the much finer horses 

« Homer: Diehtvng wid 8€Lge, 188. 
7 Higtory of Greek Literature, 1, 83. 



148 THE UNITY OF HOMER 

he carried off in the tenth book. Some allusion to th^n 
here was not only natural, but necessary, if a single poet 
had been thinking out the story. 

The great superiority of the horses of Bhesus 
over those taken from Aeneas is a pure and un- 
founded assumption. We know nothing about the 
horses of Rhesus except the words of the craven 
spy, Dolon, who hoped so to arouse the eagerness 
of Diomede and Odysseus for these horses that 
they would save him. He told them that he had 
never seen nobler or more beautiful steeds, that 
they were as white as snow and as swift as the 
wind. Nestor, when he saw them coming at night, 
compared them to the rays of the sun, evidently 
a reference to their color. But it is to be noted 
that the real expert in horseflesh, Diomede, did 
not pass any judgment upon them. When Aeneas 
drove his steeds to battle and Diomede saw them, 
he knew all about them, had their virtues and 
their pedigree on the tip of his tongue, and said 
to his squire (E 265) : ** Those horses are of the 
stock which Zeus gave to Tros in return for 
Ganymede, the very finest breed on which the sun 
shines. If we can get that team, we shall win 
great glory. ' * This is the opinion of a real expert. 
The statement that the horses of Rhesus were 
superior to those taken from Aeneas ignores both 
their divine stock and the enthusiastic appraisal 
of the calm and competent Diomede. 

Wilamowitz* great contradiction in regard to 
the seasons of the Odyssey, based on the position 



THE CONTRADICTIONS 149 

of the stars, was the result of his own ignorance 
in astronomy, and was a mistake which the merest 
novice in that science could easily have rectified. 
The next contradiction which I shall cite may 
well seem to have reached the bottom of absurdity. 
When Odysseus set foot on the land of the Phaea- 
cians, he had long been tossed on the sea, was 
without clothing, was famished, miserable, and 
wretched. While in this plight, he heard the 
laughing voices of Nausicaa and her companions 
at play. Breaking off the branches of a tree to 
cover his nakedness, he started to meet her that 
he might beg her for food, for clothing, and for 
guidance. His appearance must have been most 
repulsive, yet, by means of words of clever and 
enticing flattery, he overcame this difficulty and 
won her respect: 

I beg thee, lady, tell me if thou art a goddess, or a 
mortal. If a goddess, then I liken thee to Artemis, the 
daughter of Zeus, for such is thy statxire and thy bear- 
ing; but if thou art mortal, then thrice blessed thy 
father, thrice blessed thy mother, thrice blessed thy 
brothers. Surely their hearts must swell within them in 
glad pride because of thee.^ 

Here the poetic soul of Fick detected a great con- 
tradiction and he cried out, **How did Odysseus 
know that this fair maiden had any brothers?^' 
Odysseus konnte gar nicht wissen, oh Briider vor- 
handen war en. {Entstehtmg der Odyssee, p. 181.) 
This might seem to be the bottom in critical 
absurdity, but that honor seems to fall to the 

» f 149. 



150 THE UNITY OF HOMER 

long list of editors who have repeated the evidence 
for contradictions in the simile of the wasps found 
in n 265 ff. This simile paints the fury with 
which the impatient followers of Achilles, under 
the command of Patroclus, rushed to battle: 

They rushed forth like wasps which have a nest by 
the side of a road, wasps which little boys constantly 
anger by always stirring them up, the young rascals, 
and thus they get many into trouble ; for if any unsus- 
pecting traveler goes quietly along and disturbs them, 
they all rush out with fury and try to drive him away 
from their nest. With spirit like to theirs the Myrmidons 
moved on. 

This scene, which forms the basis of the simile, 
has been repeated a million times. Few country 
lads, indeed, can say that they never threw a stone 
or a club into a nest of wasps and then concealed 
themselves to watch the attack the angry wasps 
made upon some innocent wayfarer. It is a 
familiar fact that wasps will not fight or sting 
unless aroused in some such way as Homer 
describes. The New International Encyclopaedia 
says under the word ** wasps'*: *' Wasps are not 
dangerous except when disturbed. When they 
are flying about they are harmless unless irri- 
tated. ' ' This Homeric simile is so simple, so true 
to life, and it deals with such a well-known matter, 
that it is difficult to grasp the reasons why so 
many editors have failed to comprehend it. Fried- 
lander argued that we have here a double version 
and a contradiction. **In the first version the 
wasps were roused by the children ; in the second, 



THE CONTRADICTIONS 151 

by the traveler, '* Of course the only reason the 
wasps rush at that innocent traveler is because 
the naughty boys have already stirred them up. 
Nitzsch accepts the theory of the double version^ 
but rejects the rousing of the wasps by either the 
children or the traveler. He thinks the simile 
would gain force if the attack of the wasps is con- 
ceived as unprovoked, and would reduce the whole 
simile and its contents to the simple but vigorous 
statement : ' * The Myrmidons rushed to battle with 
all the fury of undisturbed wasps. * ' Wilamowitz 
accepts this nonsense in his Die Ilids und Homer 
(p. 127). What is most surprising in this is the 
fact that it is quoted by Doctor Leaf, with evident 
approval, in his note to 11 259. Just as Doctor 
Leaf gave up his doubts about the geography 
of the Iliad when he got away from the critics, 
so, I am sure, he will laugh to think that he ever 
quoted this absurdity, '*The simile would gain 
force, if the wasps * attack is conceived as unpro- 
voked,'* if he ever takes the trouble to walk by 
and to observe a quiet nest of unprovoked wasps. 
The first class of contradictions was due to 
the nods of the poet, the second to the nods of 
the critics. The third class of contradictions or 
inconsistencies is due to the manner in which the 
poetry was presented. Most of these contradic- 
tions fall into a category which has been named 
'* Devices of temporary expediency.'* This idea" 
goes back, in a measure, to Aristarchus, but the 
rediscovery and scientific application of this prin- 



152 THE UNITY OF HOMER 

ciple to modem Homeric criticism has been one 
of the chief reasons for the reestablishment of the 
belief in the unity of Homer, It was first worthily 
employed by Dr. Carl Bothe, in a little pamphlet 
of thirty-six pages, Die Bedeutung der Wider- 
spriiche fur die Homerische Frage (Berlin, 1891). 
The scientific value and aesthetic worth of 
German scholarship has, no doubt, been greatly 
discredited by the advocates of higher criticism, 
especially from the fact that it was in Germany 
that this theory received its so-called scientific 
birth and most of its support. Wolf, Lachmann, 
Kirchhoff , Wilamowitz, and a long list of famous 
names have done much to convince the world that 
German erudition is blind and stupid, bent on 
making false facts in order to support a false 
theory. But Goethe and Schiller regained or 
retained their honest vision and vindicated the 
poetic unity of Homer; Schliemann spumed the 
arguments of the critics and found both Troy, the 
city of Priam, and Mycenae, the home of Agamem- 
non, and Dorpf eld later gave to these discoveries 
their scientific and lasting interpretation; Lud- 
wich has kept the text of Homer free from those 
linguistic vagaries which threatened to substitute 
conjectural for traditional texts; Bothe set on 
foot the ideas in regard to contradictions which 
must prevail ; and Stiirmer and Drerup have writ- 
ten and are now writing the most detailed and 
elaborate defense of Homeric unity with which I 
am familiar, a defense which covers practically 



THE CONTRADICTIONS 153 

every verse of both poems^ including even the 
parts most suspected. When we balance the 
ledger and figure both the debit and the credit 
accounts, we must honestly admit that the world 
of Homeric scholarship is overwhelmingly in debt 
to Germany. 

Doctor Eothe's great contribution to Homeric 
study consists in the evidence that this poetry is 
not complicated and involved, but simple and 
carried by a single thread, each scene being 
constructed or planned for its own sake. For 
example, the poet wished to give a picture of 
private and domestic life, and with this in view he 
planned the parting scene between Hector and 
Andromache. No other actor than Hector could 
be used. The poet therefore had him leave the 
field at just that moment when he was most 
urgently needed as a fighter, ostensibly for the 
purpose of urging that sacrifices be offered to 
Athena. This was a service the lowliest soldier 
could have performed. But the lowliest soldier 
could not play a part in the scene with Andro- 
mache, and so Hector was spared from the battle. 
Each scene in Homer must have the attention of 
the audience as it is heard. It is not enough that 
the hearer was interested yesterday, and that 
there will be another scene to interest him to- 
morrow. The poet must focus his own and his 
hearers ' attention on the scene that is now being 
recited. The poet has always a definite notion 
of his actors, for they are consistent throughout. 



154 THE UNITY OF HOMER 

But he takes little interest in the way in which he 
poses them or brings them on or sends them off 
the stage. 

The epic poet had no means but language for 
denoting the coming or going of actors or for a 
change in scenery or background. Often a person 
appears, acts, then disappears, without a word 
from the poet to teU us he is gone. Had the poet 
described the coming or going of each participant 
in the action, the narrative would be dull and 
tedious. Much is left to the intelligence and imag- 
ination of his hearers. Gods and heroes slip from 
place to place with amazing suddenness and in 
absolute silence. The eye gives the needed infor- 
mation in the theater or in a moving picture, but 
no such help was at hand for the epic poet. In 
O 17 Achilles laid down his spear; fifty verses 
later it is back in his hand. The fact that he has 
it later is proof enough that he must have picked 
it up, an action we could have seen on the stage, 
but which must be tacitly assumed in Homer. 
When Poseidon came over the sea to the battle- 
field he came in his magnificent chariot drawn 
by fleet steeds with manes of gold. He shackled 
them with golden shackles that they should await 
his return.' But when he left the field there is no 
mention either of his shackled horses or of the 
method of his going.* Zeus had been watching the 
battle from Mt. Ida,*® yet all at once he is back in 
Olympus." Ares was sitting on the outskirts of 

8 N 23. 10 152. 

219. 11 n 431. 



THE CONTRADICTIONS 155 

the battle with his horses and chariot," but when 
he arrived, he came apparently on f oot.^* Athena 
and Hera came to the plain of Troy in a chariot. 
They unhitched their horses, turned them out to 
graze, and started to aid the Greeks." But the 
goddesses apparently forgot their horses and left 
them there, for their return from the field of battle 
is told in a single verse: *' Athena with Hera re- 
turned to Olympus. * ^" These apparent slips are 
all to be explained by the fact that epic poetry 
depended solely on the ear; if every detail had 
been given, the poem would have been so encum- 
bered as to be intolerable. 

The length of the Hiad, over 15,000 verses, 
made it impossible for more than a small portion 
to be recited at a single time. The poet must 
therefore so plan his work as to assist the bard 
by making it possible for him to recite at a single 
time, portions fairly complete, yet so related with 
what has gone before and with what is yet to be 
as to create pleasure by recalling what has been 
already heard and by anticipating that which is 
to follow. The present division of each poem into 
twenty-four books is purely arbitrary — so arbi- 
trary, indeed, that a sentence begun in Odyssey p 
is concluded in the following book. The division 
was made by the grammarians of Alexandria in 
order to facilitate references and was based on 
the twenty-four letters of the Greek alphabet. 

WE 856. i*B 775. 

IS B 85. IS E 907. 



156 THB UNITY OP HOMER 

Professor Dremp, by means of repeated tests, 
has found that a skilled reciter can pronounce, 
with proper intonations, about five hundred 
Homeric verses per hour, and that the powers 
of a reciter are practically exhausted in two 
hours; hence a rhapsodist would be limited on a 
single occasion to about one thousand verses. 
With this limit in mind, he started to read the 
Iliad, and found to his great delight that the poem 
easily divided itself into such groups, each group, 
like the whole, having a beginning, a middle, and 
an end ; each complete in itself, yet each a part of 
the greater unity of the whole/* If Homer is 
read with these two facts in mind, first, that the 
poems were created to be recited in portions of 
about one thousand verses each, and, second, that 
the bard must, without the help of stage setting 
or background, concentrate the attention on the 
scene he is then presenting, most of the so-called 
inconsistencies and contradictions will disappear. 

I shall apply these principles to two of the 
most criticised contradictions in Homer : first, the 
refusal of Diomede to meet Glaucus, lest he should 
prove to be a god, despite the fact that he has on 
that very day wounded both Aphrodite and Ares ; 
and, second, that it was noon twice, apparently, on 
the same day. In E 127 Athena took the mist from 
the eyes of Diomede so that he could recognize 
the gods and thus know and wound Aphrodite. 
This purpose was realized in verse 330. Diomede 
perceived the goddess and thrust her with his 

i« Drerap, Dof funfte Bu6k der lUat, 421. 



V- 

THB CONTRADICTIONS 157 



spear. A few verses further on Diomede is de- 
scribed as rushing at Aeneas, although he knew 
that Apollo protected him, thus clearly showing 
that the power of miraculous sight still remained 
with him. Again in verse 815 he recognized 
Athena at once. The command to wound only 
Aphrodite was later enlarged by Athena herself 
and made to include the wounding of Ares. From 
the time when Athena gave this power to 
Diomede, in E 127, to the end of that book, he 
retained this miraculous vision, so that he was 
able to see and to know the gods. At the end 
of book five there is plainly a pause in the poem, 
the field is deserted by the gods, who return to 
Olympus, and the bard, as well as the hearers, 
takes a needed rest. No one can read the Iliad 
without feeling that the poet planned an inter- 
mission at this place. 

With book six the poem takes a new start. The 
gift of Athena was a special gift for a special 
purpose, and both the gift and its purpose were 
a part of the preceding book. No unprejudiced 
reader would argue that the gift of miraculous 
sight was a perpetual gift. It must also be 
observed that each deity wounded in book five 
was wounded by the express orders of Athena. 
When book six opens, Athena has withdrawn from 
the scene of action, and Diomede has returned to 
his normal vision and also to his natural fear of 
fighting one of the gods. When Glaucus appeared, 
therefore, Diomede, still evidently under the spell 



158 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

and the excitement of his previous exploits, hesi- 
tated to meet him, lest he should prove to be a 
god. These words of Diomede would have con- 
stituted an impossible contradiction had they 
appeared in the previous book, but in book six 
Athena and her divine gift are both alike with- 
drawn, and Diomede is once more a mortal hero 
with neither the power to discern nor the will to 
fight a divine being. 

In A 84 occur the words, "As long as it was 
morning and the sacred day waxed. ' ' This would 
seem to indicate the end of the morning, a time 
near noon. The battle then beginning continued 
through long stretches of intense and apparently 
protracted fighting. Then we are suddenly told, 
five books later (11 775), **As long as the ^un 
bestrode the center of the heaven. '* The actual 
time marked between the end of the morning and 
the beginning of the afternoon could hardly be 
more than five hours, yet the fighting which has 
been pictured as falling in that interval seems 
almost endless. The manner of Homeric recita- 
tion made it impossible for the poet to picture 
events as taking place simultaneously, so that he 
never leaves one scene and moves to another by 
saying, ** While these things were done here, such 
other things happened there. ' ' He always seems 
to say, ** After these things were done here, those 
things were done there.*' 

At the opening of the Odyssey the poet tells 
how the gods planned to send Hermes to the 



THE CONTRADICTIONS 159 

island of Calypso in order that he might deliver 
to her the divine decree to send Odysseus on his 
way to Ithaca. As soon as the gods had made 
this decision, Athena herself hurried to Ithaca to 
set affairs there in order, to encourage Tele- 
machus, and to prepare for the return of Odys- 
seus. This visit of Athena and its consequences 
fill about four books and we almost lose sight of 
the results of the deliberation of the gods with 
which the poem began. At the beginning of the 
fifth book the poet had his choice of picturing 
Hermes as going to Calypso while Athena was at 
Ithaca, or of starting his poem all over again. 
The second method was the one the poet chose. 
The gods were again assembled, and Hermes was 
again ordered to bear to Calypso the unerring 
command of the gods. A like problem confronted 
the poet who described the long series of battles 
which followed on the day after the fruitless 
efforts of the embassy to induce Achilles to aban- 
don his wrath. He had the choice of prolonging 
the day or of dividing the battles with the exploits 
of another night. He had already pictured a night 
with crowded events, an assembly, an embassy to 
Achilles, and the exploits of Diomede and Odys- 
seus, so that he would hardly care to fill a second 
night with kindred or rival incidents, hence pro- 
longed the day and crowded a mass of action 
between late morning and early afternoon. The 
verses describing this day's fighting number 
about five thousand, or almost one third of the 



160 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

entire Iliad, so that the bard could hardly have 
recited it in fewer than five separate appear- 
ances. This fact would make it most difficult for 
the hearers to notice that all these events belonged 
to the same day, or that too much had been 
crowded ' into the few hours of midday. The 
multitude of events assigned to this one day is 
a part of that poetic economy which chose to 
lengthen the day rather than to prolong the poem 
by creating and describing the events of another 
night on the battle-field under exactly the same 
conditions as obtained on the night before. 

Many things in Homer are done for a poetic 
purpose and when that poetic purpose is once 
achieved, the matter itself is forgotten. In book 
four the poet desired some act of treachery by 
which the oaths should be broken and the Trojans 
made to bear the blame, hence the shooting of 
Menelaus by Pandarus. This act was not intended 
to hurt Menelaus, except in so far as some such 
an act was necessary to break the truce and put 
the Trojans in the light of perjurers. This pur- 
pose was gained by the mere fact of the wound, 
so that as soon as the battle was started, a battle 
due to this treachery, the wound had no further 
poetic purpose and Menelaus became entirely well. 
He even offered to accept the challenge which 
Hector had made to the best of the Greeks to 
engage in a single combat, and that, too, without 
a thought of the wound he had received but a few 
hours before. In book eleven the great warriors. 



THE CONTRADICTIONS 161 

Agamemnon^ Diomede, and Odysseus, were all 
so seriously wounded that they were forced to 
retire from action. They were wounded for this 
very purpose, that they should retire and thus 
make it possible for Hector to strike terror into 
the hearts of the Greeks, to draw Patroclus into 
the struggle, and by his death to give Achilles a 
fitting occasion for abandoning his wrath and 
returning to the combat. 

These men were wounded for a temporary 
poetic purpose, and when that purpose had been 
gained they came back fully recovered. Diomede, 
althou^ he had been shot through the foot, was 
able in but three days to take two prizes in the 
games. Odysseus, even though he had been so 
badly wounded in the side that his ribs were 
exposed, yet competed in the wrestling match, the 
worst possible thing for sore ribs; and he won 
the foot race, defeating even the swift-footed 
Antilochus. The wound of Menelaus lasted only 
long enough to effect the breaking of the truce 
and to convict the Trojans of treachery ; and the 
other three nursed their wounds until Achilles 
came back into action. With the breaking of the 
truce, Menelaus completely recovered; with the 
return of Achilles, the wounds of Agamemnon, 
Diomede, and Odysseus were immediately healed. 
A second reason for the wounding of these heroes 
is that it would be a balm to Greek pride to know 
that Hector could accomplish little so long as 
these men remained on the field. 



162 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

Many contradictions depend upon the changed 
attitude or state of mind of the speaker. Achilles 
in book nine rejected with dignified anger the 
appeal of the ambassadors, telling them how dear 
Briseis was to him, how much he loved her. In 
this scene Achilles imagined that his great anger 
because of the insult offered him by Agamemnon 
was due to his passion for Briseis ; but when later, 
because of the death of Patroclus, his anger had 
been turned to remorse, he exclaimed: **If only 
Artemis had slain her on the very day I captured 
her city** (T 59). The first speech was that of a 
man in anger ; the second the speech of that same 
man in remorse because of the results of that 
anger. If the second passage stood without the 
first, half of its effect would be lost. Again in 
the same book Achilles told the ambassadors that 
Hector never dared leave the walls of Troy while 
he himself was fighting, yet Agamenmon had tried 
to dissuade Menelaus from meeting Hector in 
single combat on the ground that even Achilles 
hesitated to meet Hector in battle. The words 
used by Achilles in the passage quoted were 
spoken in disparagement of the Greeks. The 
exaggerated praise of Hector in the mouth of 
Agamenmon was intended to discourage and 
frighten Menelaus. 

Finally there are contradictions which may 
be termed temporal contradictions, such as the 
fact that in the tenth year of the war Helen points 
out to Priam the leaders of the Oreeks, and he 



THE CONTRADICTIONS 163 

does not know them or their names; also that a 
wall to protect the camp is not built until so late 
in the war; and, lastly, the arrival of so many- 
Trojan allies after the war has already continued 
for more than nine years. 

We may assume the following background for 
the war of the Iliad :^^ The Greeks, in large num- 
bers and well-prepared, came to attack Troy. The 
Trojans, protected by the strong walls of their 
citadel, refused to meet the foe in the open field, 
and contented themselves with occasional sallies 
on the camp or against scattered divisions of the 
enemy. Their plan was much like that of Pericles 
in the early years of the Peloponnesian War. 
Supplies came regularly into the beleaguered 
city, and the Greeks seemed unable to capture 
it by storm or to reduce it by starvation. After 
several years of this vain effort the Greeks 
realized that Troy could not be taken so long as 
she kept her communications in the rear open, 
and they determined to cut them. This resulted 
in the ** Great Foray,'* in which Briseis and 
Chryseis became spoils of war. The Greeks 
were already in control of the sea and now that 
they were able to intercept or threaten supplies 
coming by land, Troy must fight or fall, and thus 
for the first time she called upon her allies. 
Since the ability to withstand a siege when pro- 
tected by such impregnable walls as those of Troy 
depended on the presence of supplies, it was to 

17 This 18 based largely on Leaf's Troy. 



164 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

the interest of the invested city to have as few 
as possible to feed. Had she summoned her allies 
while she was still pursuing the defensive policy, 

(she would have hastened her own ruin and would 
have brought upon herself the very calamity 
Lysander brought upon Athens after the victory 
at Aegospotami. 

But this defensive policy had to be abandoned 
when once they were cut off from the source of 
supplies and they must summon reinforcements. 
This explains why Rhesus and so many others 
had just arrived or were arriving to assist the 
Trojans during the action of the Hiad. The 
exhausted resources of the Trojans and the re- 
sulting presence of their allies caused a complete 
change in the plans of the war, for the Oreeks were 
no longer the attacking army but the attacked. 
The real cause of this change was the success of 
the Greek efforts in forcing the Trojans into 
starvation, but the poet hides the true reason 
under the poetic device of the ** Wrath.*' This 
was put at just the time when the economic dis- 
tress forced the Trojans to assume the aggressive. 
With this change of policy the Greeks must pre- 
pare, not for attack, but for defense, hence the 
necessity for building the wall and digging the 
great ditch. The wall would have been of little 
use during the earlier years of the war, but now, 
with the Trojans desperate and reinforced by 
their allies, and all determined to fight, the camp 
of the Greeks must be protected. 



THE CONTRADICTIONS 165 

It was the unexpected prowess of the Trojans, 
but above all the sudden presence of the allies, 
that crushed the spirit of Agamemnon. After the 
siege had been pressed for ten years he found the 
Trojans suddenly strengthened. This unantici- 
pated accession of allied forces explains his words 
of disappointment (B 130) : ** But allies from many 
cities are here, who bafSe me greatly and thwart 
my efforts to sack the well-walled city Troy.'* 
Just when he thought the siege had ruined the 
power of the enemy and that the Trojans were 
his only antagonists he found that his hopes were 
bafSed by the arrival of the allies. Immediately 
the whole aspect of things was changed; the 
Greeks who had been thinking only of the ruin 
of the Trojans were forced to provide for their 
own safety, a wall was built, pickets were posted, 
spies sent out, and military tactics were adopted, 
as if it were indeed the beginning of the war. 
Many events, such as the muster of the troops, 
the report of the Trojan picket on the numbers 
of the Greeks, the duel between Paris and Mene- 
laus, the view from the walls, do not strictly 
belong to the tenth year of the war; but the 
poet must give some impression of the appear- 
ance of the army and of the tactics employed, of 
the regal bearing of Agamemnon, of the beauty 
of Helen, and of her mental attitude toward her 
present and her former husband. Since he did 
not describe the earlier years of the war the poet 
must insert them in the only part he did describe. 



166 THE UNITY OP HOMEB 

Homer *s plan of crowding all the events of the 
poem into the space of a few days did not permit 
him to' picture both ends of a long war, hence 
scenes are put into the last few days which in a 
prose narrative would have come much earlier." 

Shakespeare, in the advice given by Polonius 
to his son, Laertes, furnishes a perfect parallel to 
these inconsistencies. That young man had long 
been in France, whence he returned to Denmark 
that he might be present at the coronation. Yet, 
when he was on the point of going back, his father 
told him how to dress in France, and added many 
details of conduct, as if he were leaving Denmark 
for the first time. No doubt this scene from 
Hamlet would have better suited the first home- 
leaving of Laertes, but as that fell outside the 
limits of the poem the poet must either insert it 
here or omit it altogether. 

It was on the basis of such contradictions as 
have been given that Lachmann and all his fol- 
lowers erected the theory that Homer originally 
consisted of a mass of small songs which a learned 
commission later grouped around a central theme, 
and this commission could not or would not re- 
shape these songs so as to remove the contradic- 
tions. There are two proofs, among many, which 
seem to me to make the idea that Homer origi- 
nated by the collection of independent songs im- 
possible : first, the manner in which the different 
actors are introduced, and, second, the description 

18 ''Assumed Duration of the War of the Biad,'' Clan. FhO^ 
VIII, 445. 



THE CONTRADICTIONS 167 

of the different persons whose forms the various 
gods assume. 

Homer has two methods of introducing his 
actors : first, he gives a fairly detailed introduction 
at the time of their first appearance, or, second, 
an actor appears with no introduction but his 
name, then disappears, to be given later a de- 
tailed introduction just before he begins to play 
an important part in the action of the poem. 
When Nestor first appeared he was introduced 
thus: 

Then Nestor the sweet-voiced arose, the eloquent 
orator of the men of Pylos, from whose lips speech 
sweeter thau honey flowed. Two generations of men had 
come and gone since he was bom, and now he was ruling 
over the third. 

This lengthy description shows that he is to have 
a prominent part in the poem. He is formally 
introduced nowhere else, so that when he appears 
in any other part of Homer it is always as a leader 
who is perfectly well-known. When Briseis first 
moves across the stage she is only a mute figure, 
hence there is no detailed introduction, but as she 
leaves the scene we are confident that she will re- 
appear and we shall learn more about her. When 
she comes on again (T 287), we learn that she is a 
widow whose husband fell at the hands of Achilles, 
who also slew her three brothers and destroyed her 
city at the time he slew her husband. In a similar 
manner Patroclus comes on the stage and walks 
away in silence, and with no introduction, but he, 
too, will reappear and be introduced (A 770) be- 



168 THE UNITY OF HOMER 

fore he takes a prominent part in the poem. The 
first book was so crowded with excitement that 
Briseis and Patrodus remained mute and waited 
for a lull in the action, and waited also to be intro- 
duced until they were to take a prominent place 
on the center of the stage. 

Exactly similar is the method of the Odyssey. 
When Eurycleia comes on, we are told her name, 
the name of her father, and of her father 's father, 
how she came into the family of Odysseus, and 
what price had been paid for her. This detailed 
introduction points to the prominent part she is 
to take in the later events of the poem. She is 
introduced thus only here; in the subsequent 
books she comes and goes as one perfectly well- 
known to the hearers. The method of her intro- 
duction is similar to that by which Nestor was 
brought before the hearers of the Iliad. In the 
earlier poem Briseis and Patroclus came on as 
mutes to be introduced in later books. So the 
first reference to the swineherd is in a chance 
remark that '*The suitors supposed that Tele- 
machus was out in the fields with the flocks, or 
perhaps he might be with the swineherd. ' '" The 
poet gives no inkling of who the swineherd is 
when he is mentioned for the first time, since he 
is not to act for several days, but before he begins 
to take a prominent part we are told the story 
of his life and how it happens that so fine a spirit 
should be found in a bondsman.*^ 

10 8 640. 20 403. 



THE CONTRADICTIONS 169 

Had the formal and detailed introduction of 
Nestor, Patroclus, Eurydeia, and Enmaeus been 
given in several books we could believe that these 
various introductions belonged to independent 
songs; but it is hard to believe that there was a 
group of such independent songs, that the same 
actor should appear in several songs, but by 
accident no two songs give a detailed introduction 
of the same person. Such heroes as Achilles, 
Ajax, and others of the first rank were known to 
the poet's audience from tradition and therefore 
needed no formal introduction. The description 
Helen gave to Priam of the different leaders as 
viewed from the walls of Troy was not an intro- 
duction but an effort on the part of the poet to 
picture the regal bearing of Agamemnon or the 
characteristic traits of the others there described. 

Even more convincing is the fact that when- 
ever a god appears in the form of a definite and 
named person, a detailed description is always 
added unless the god appears in the form of a 
person who has already been described or who 
has previously appeared in the action of the 
poem. When the god does appear in the form 
of a person who has already been introduced, 
then there is no description of that person." The 
two following examples will illustrate the prin- 
ciple: Poseidon in N 45 appeared to the Greeks 
in the form of Calchas, with no explanation of 
who Calchas was; but as Calchas had already 

»" Phoenix in the Iliad," Amerioan Journal of Philology, 
ZXXIII, 08. 



170 THE UNITY OF HOMER 

been introduced and had taken part in the action 
of the poem, no introduction was necessary. Iris, 
in the second book, came to the Trojans to warn 
them of the advance of the Oreeks, assuming the 
form of Polites, the son of Priam, who sat as a 
picket for the Trojans, trusting in the fleetness 
of his feet. Polites, whose form the divinity 
assumed, had not been previously named, hence 
the detailed introduction. The fact that in all the 
numerous appearances of some god under human 
form the person whose likeness the god assumes 
is invariably described, unless that person has 
already been introduced, but, if that person has 
been thus introduced, no description is ever 
added, can not be explained on any theory of edit- 
ing independent songs, but must be due to a single 
plan and a single author." 

This principle cannot be the result of mere 
chance or accident, for there are sixteen different 
persons whose foi^n the gods assimie in the Iliad 
alone. This law shows also that the parts or books 
of the poems must have been composed in much 
the same order as we now have them. So far as I 
know this principle escaped the notice of all the 
earlier scholars or editors, hence it is impossible 
to assume that Homer was rewritten by later 
bards or compilators to bring the songs in har- 
mony therewith. These two facts, that people 
are not introduced twice and that when gods 
assume the forms of men, the men are always 

ssAll the examples are printed in full in the Am, Jour, of 
PhO., XXXTTT, 69 ff. 



THE CONTRADICTIONS 171 

described nnless they have acted previonsly, and 
if they have acted previously are never described, 
show convincingly that the poems of Homer were 
conceived as wholes, and are not dne to the grad- 
ual composition of independent songs, whether 
these songs were composed by various bards or 
by Homer himself. 



CHAPTEEVI 

THE INDIVIDUALIZATION OF GODS AND 

HEROES 

Pope begins the Preface to his translation of 
the Iliad with these words : **Hojmer is universally 
allowed to have had the greatest invention of any 
writer whatever/' A part of that invention is 
the ability to create characters independent of 
their author, who speak and act as if from their 
own volition with no regard for the opinions or 
prejudices of the one who created them. 

Homer and Shakespeare, beyond all others, 
called into being actors who speak and live in such 
a detached manner that we can form no justified 
conclusions from them in regard to the sentiments 
of the poets themselves. Even in Shakespeare 
there does not seem to be absolute detachment, 
for the ruin which ultimately comes to the villains 
in his dramas seems intended to illustrate a moral 
tale. Jn the great work of Cervantes we can trace 
his religious beliefs ; and the story he tells of the 
young Moslem maiden who deserted her kind and 
thoughtful father because of her change of faith, 
shows an almost limitless intolerance in those 
beliefs. Most editors of Cervantes reconstruct his 
biography from indications found in his own writ- 



GODS AND HEROES 173 

ings. This is trae, also, of Dante, whose works 
reveal his hates, his loves, and his hope,^ so that 
his writings also famish the best sources for his 
biography. Bunyan had the power to individual- 
ize characters, but aflsof them reveal the convic- 
tions of Bunyan; while in Byron the speaker is 
always voicing the ideas of Byron and never 
becomes detached. Homer, however, has so indi-^ 
viduaUzed his characters that they move in his ' 
poetry and live in history as independent beings, 
who speak their own thoughts, not Homer's, and 
perform their own acts. He does not attempt to 
justify the ways of God to man, nor to show*! \ 
that righteousness leads to happiness, and sin to I J 
misery and shame. * /- . ^ . jy 

'^he two noblest characters of the Iliad mee^ 
their death directly or indirectly by the treachery 1 
or cruelty of the gods. Phoebus Apollo, concealed / 
in a cloud, stole behind Patroclus and, smiting : 
him, left him helpless in the presence of his foe. | 
Pallas Athena came to Hector in the guise of his \ 
brother, induced him to face the antagonist by > 
assuring him of her help, then revealed herself 
as a cruel impostor by treacherously helping . 
Achilles ; and she showed no mercy to the gallant 
warrior whom she thus lured to destruction. ' 
Though Patroclus and Hector die, Paris survives.J 
When the story of the Hiad ends he is still in ; 
possession of HeUn, free from remorse, and 
rather glad to be rid of his virtuous brother, ' 

1 Professor deSalTio, "Dante and Medieval Herei^y" Bomanic 
Beview, 1920, 239 if. 



174 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

whose nobility and speech alike reproached him. 

Achilles received misery and not blessedness for 

his bravery, lamenting in Hades the rash choice 

he had made when he chose a short life with glory 

/^in preference to a long and ignoble career. For 

^^ these reasons I am nnable to accept the thesis of 

•^ J. Denton Snider in his really able book {Homer's 

*y [ Iliad f p. 497) : "We have an attempt on the poet's 

f part to set forth the idea and the workings of a 

^^i^^Providential Order in the affairs of men'' or in 

the statement of Wood (p. 235) : "Homer's great 

object was to make mankind, and especially his 

countrymen, wiser and better." Similar ideas 

permeate and vitiate the Homeric writings of 

Gladstone. The gods whom Homer pictures are 

not the gods he worshipped; they are poetic cre- 

/ ^ations whom Homer adapted to his own needs 

\ without fear and evidently without reverence. 

y^ The following illustrations will suffice to show 

l^bi the poet of the Iliad was not trying to arouse 

I a feeling of affection or reverence for the divine 

\ beings. Whenever a Greek or a Trojan was 

I wounded or slain in battle he never uttered a word 

/ of complaint. Patroclus died with a taunt to 

\ Hector that he need not boast, for his days are 

(numbered and he will soon die at the hands of 
Achilles. When Hector meets his fate he, too, 
taunts Achilles with that death which is awaiting 
him. Two gods were wounded in the narrative 
of the Iliad, Aphrodite and Ares. When Aphro- 
dite received a slight wound on the wrist, she 



) 



OODS AND HEROES 175 

rushed from the battle, ^^ wailing londly," m^« 
Idxovtraj came to Ares, told him of her terrible 
sufferings, X/i^y a^^o/uu fXjco^^ got into his chariot 
in awful anguish, iuctfx^M^j hurried to Olympus, ^ 
threw herself into her mother's arms, and told "^ 
her pitiful story. Her mother tried to console 
her by telling a tale of the woes the gods had 
undergone at the hands of mortal men — ^that even 
Ares had been put in a brazen jug and been kept 
there for full thirteen months. This same Ares, 
the god of battles, appeared on the battlefield and 
was wounded by the human warrior, Diomede. 
He bellowed, ifipax^^ as loudly as nine or ten thou- 
sand men shout in battle, then rushed to Olympus 
where he told his woes to father Zeus, who showed 
him no pity, but roundly berated him, instead. 
Early in the fourth book of the Iliad Zeus seemed 
eager to bring the war to an immediate conclusion, 
so that Troy might remain standing and Helen 
return to her home, and a general reconciliation 
follow. To this fair proposal Hera replied in the 
most bitter anger that Troy must perish and Zeus 
must not permit the piety of Priam and Priam's 
people to thwart her purposes ; that, if Zeus will 
surrender to her vengeance a righteous people 
whom he loves, she, in turn, will hand over to his 
will the cities she loves most of all, Argos, Sparta, 
and Mycenae — a brutality never surpassed on 
earth, yet rivaled when Antony, Augustus, and 
Lepidus turned over their friends to be murdered 
in return for the privilege of slaying their foes. 



176 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

/T This ignoble conception of the gods is uni- 

\ form throughout all parts of Homeric poetry. In 
] the first book of the Iliad Zens is pictured as a 

/ bully in his own home, who hurled his son from 
the threshold of Olympus, because that son had 
tried to shield his mother from one of the father's 
savage attacks; in B Zeus beguiled Agamemnon 
by means of a lying dream ; in F Aphrodite showed 
herself to Helen as a most base and cruel goddess ; 
in A Athena induced Pandarus to violate the oaths, 
then assisted in bringing about his death for the 
very baseness of which she was the cause; in E 
Aphrodite and Ares played most ignoble roles; 
in H Zeus allowed himself to be turned from his 
purposes by his carnal desires and when in Y the 
gods met to fight, it was a farce beneath the dig- 
nity of the most ignoble warriors of the poem. 
In the Odyssey again the wanderings of the hero 
largely depended on the anger of Poseidon, which 
had been aroused because Odysseus had dared to 
defend himself against that god's cannibal son; 
Athena was ever ready to lie or to deceive; and 
I Ares and Aphrodite were as adulterous in this 
poem as they had been inglorious in the Iliad. 

In either poem the gods could take on any form 
they chose; they could assume not only the char- 

/ acter of men but the shapes of animals as weU. 
This identity of conception is well illustrated by 
Athena. Twice she assumed the character of a 

\^ herald, in B 280, when she assisted in bringing the 
'Greeks to silence, and in 6 8, when she helped 




) 



\ 



GODS AND HEROES 177 

AlcinotLS gather the people together to welcome 
the stranger. Similarly, in y) 20, in the guise of 
a maiden carrying a pitcher, she met Odysseus 
and directed him to the palace of Alcinous. In 
H 59, taking the form of an osprey, she sat on a 
tree and watched the combat between Hector 
and Ajax. In x 240 she looked down upon the 
slaughter of the suitors as she sat, in the form of 
a swallow, on a beam in the hall. The conception "| 
of the gods is the same in all parts of both poems, 
except that in a time of war the gods always seem 
more in evidence and more crueL The Homeri^ 
gods are not superior beings who reward virtue t 
in others or practice it themselves. They are only 
occasionally sublime and rarely deserve reverence 
or affection. ^ 

We can in a rough way construct a Homeric\ 
mjrthology, but we do not have the materials for \ 
appraising the religious element in Homer. It ! 
is fortunate for our civilization that the early 
teachers and theologians of the Hebrews were / 
prophets and not poets. The halls of Olympus 1 
would have resounded with peals of ** Homeric » 
laughter'* had Zeus laid down a code of laws 
which contained such a sentence as : * * Honor thy 
father and thy mother,'* for all knew too well 
what he had done to his own father Cronos; 

or such a sentence as ^^Thou shalt not commit . 

• 

adultery,*' when they all knew the scandals of 
his many amours. Most of the divinities would ,■ 
have been conscientious nullificationists if there / 



178 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

Thad been any interdict on lying, covetousneBS, 
) and stealing. Yet in the face of these gods the 
I Homeric Greeks honored their parents, and lived 
i decent as well as honest lives. 

No one has ever more thoroughly grasped the 
meaning of the Homeric gods than Pope, who 
gives this sensible opinion in his Preface: 

If Homer was not the first who introduced the 
deities, as Herodotus imagines, into the religion of 
Greece, he seems to be the first who brought them into 
^ a machinery for poetry, and such a one as makes 
its greatest dignity and importance: for we find those 
authors who have been offended at the literal notion of 
the gods, constantly laying their accusation against 
Homer as the chief support of it. But whatever cause 
there might be to blame his machinery in a philosophical 
or religious view, they are so perfect in the poetic that 
mankind has been ever since contented to follow them; 
none have been able to enlarge the sphere of poetry 
beyond the limits he has set: every attempt of this 
nature has proved unsuccessful : and after all the various 
changes of time and religions, his gods continue to this 
day the gods of poetry. 

In these few words Pope has given all that need 
be said about Homeric religions beliefs. Homer 
drew the portraits of his gods with the hand of a 
poet, and as poetic portraits they are still the 
delight and envy of poets. It is to misunderstand 
and to degrade the genius of the poet to appraise 
him as a teacher of ethics or of religion. Homer, 
in spite of his picture of the gods, may have been 
a man of simple faith, for it must be remembered 
that the ages in which faith seems unquestioned 



GODS AND HEROES 179 

are generally those in which religions beliefs are 
most broadly caricatured; hence travelers to 
churches erected in the early Middle Ages are 
often shocked by the farcical illustrations of 
Bible stories. 

After having glanced at Homer's gods we shall 
turn to his men. Here again Pope furnishes just 
the necessary words : 

We come now to the characters of his persons : and 
here we shall find no author has ever drawn so many, 
with so visible and so surprising a variety, or given 
us such lively and affecting impressions of them. Every 
one has something so singularly his own that no painter 
could have distinguished them more by their features, 
than the poet has by their manners. 

Perhaps no poet has ever created so many out- 
standing men and women who have passed into 
the common language of the world. Helen, 
Hecuba, Andromache, Penelope, each repre- 
sents a different aspect of domestic life; Ajax, 
Nestor, Achilles, Patroclus, Odysseus, Diomede, 
Antilochus, Hector, were all warriors, yet each 
stands for something distinct and individual, 
something not represented by the others. These 
characters do not represent types, abstract ideas, 
but human beings, each with his own life and his 
own problems. Nestor is not the personification 
of the wisdom coming from long experience, nor 
is Ajax the embodiment of brute force. They are 
all men showing the weakness as well as the 
strength of men. 



180 THE UNITY OF HOMER 

The writers of other Greek epics whose work 
has survived, snoh as Qnintus and ApoUonius, 
seemed unable to make their characters real and 
individual, and Vergil notably failed in creating 

P characters which live. ** Pious'* Aeneas is not 
regarded as a type of the virtue which the poet 
desired to represent, and most people feel a sort 
of contempt for the hero of the Aeneid.* All of 
Milton's characters fail to impress us, except 
perhaps Satan himself. Certainly Milton would 
not feel complimented if he knew that in his great 
poem, written to ** justify the ways of God to 
man, ' ' the character of Satan should be regarded 
as his greatest success. This ability to indi- 

. vidualize character is in all parts of Homer and 
shows itself in all his actors. He has succeeded 
not a whit better with Achilles and Hector than 
with Eumaeus, the swineherd, Nausicaa, and the 
Cyclops, or even with the dog, Argus. Each is 
a distinct creation and as worthy his creator as 
any of the rest. 

If I were asked to pick out a single little scene 
which shows, as fully as a single scene can show, 
the measure of the poet's greatness in the sym- 
pathetic delineation of character, that scene would 
be the few verses in which the blinded and baffled 
Cyclops takes hold of the ram which is bearing 
to a place of safety the very man who has blinded 
him, and says : 

sHacaulaj on re-reading Vergil expressed himself as greatlj 
disappointed bj the inability of the poet to give human char- 
acter to his actors. Treyeljan, Life and Letters of Maoaitlay, 
I, 329. 



GODS AND HEROES 181 

Dear ram, why is it that for my sake you are thus 
coming out of the cave the last of tiie flock t Never 
before have you been left behind by the others, but you 
were always the first to graze upon the tender blades 
of grass, you were the first to come to the streams of 
water, and at evening, you were ever the first to return 
to the fold. But now you are the very last. Can it be 
that you long for the eye of your master? 

Homer could not create or represent this monster 
without creating in him that sentiment which 
made him yearn for companionship and made him 
feel that he had found sympathy in the breast of 
this ram. How gentle the heart of the poet who 
could create a feeling of pity for this cannibal 
Cyclops I How compassionate the poet who could 
also feel for a poor old neglected dog, that had 
yearned for his master for twenty years, then at 
last sees him coming home, only to die of a broken 
heart — ^broken with joyl 

Others might think the choicest cameo-like 
description in Homer is found in the words of 
lamentation spoken by Briseis over the dead body 
of Patroclus, and in the wise comment of the poet : 
'^Thus she spake weeping, and all the other 
women joined therein, apparently weeping for 
Patroclus, but each was really thinking of her ^. 
own sorrows.*' No one could have failed to 
observe at funerals that they weep most bitterly j\*o^' 
for the dead who have in their own lives suffered Ct^ 
the keenest bereavement. An outstanding proof 
of the genius of Homer is in this, that he makes 
no effort to withhold his great ideas for his great 



ij* 



182 THE UNITY OF HOMER 

characters and his great occasions^ and, like a man 
drawing water from the ocean, he has no fear of 
exhaustion, no need to practice thrift. 

Homer's power to create and individualize 
character will be illustrated in detail by two per- 
sons, selected because they appear in both poems, 
Helen and Odysseus. 

When Homer introduces Helen in the Hiad 
she must appear so lovely and so beautiful that 
it will seem worth the effort of a nation to carry 
on a long war for her sake, and this must be the 
judgment of all. But this is difficult, for there is 
a great diversity in what is esteemed beautiful. 
One admires the blonde, another the brunette, one 
a plump figure, another a willowy figure, so that 
in praising any style of beauty one must expect to 
meet with adverse opinion. A second difficulty 
which confronts the poet lies in the fact that Helen 
has deserted a fine husband and has long been 
living in adultery. Homer masters all these dif- 
ficulties by making no attempt to describe her and 
by allowing the hearer to estimate her beauty by 
the effect she produces on others. Helen is hard 
at work with her needle when she is told that 
Paris and Menelaus are on the point of fighting 
a duel for her sake. She goes at once modestly 
toward the walls of the city, from which there 
is a view of the field and the army, and finds there 
the old men of Troy — ^men who had suffered much, 
men who had lost their possessions and their 
kindred for her sake, men too old to be moved 



GODS AND HEROES 183 

by the sight of ordinary beauty. When these 
afflicted men see Helen coming toward them they 
have not a word of reproach, as they say to one 
another, '^It is no wonder that the Trojans and 
the Greeks have long endured miseries for the 
sake of such a woman, since she is as fair as the 
immortal gods. ' ' Priam calls to her, ' ' Dear child, 
come and sit near me so that you may see your 
former husband, your kinsmen, and your friends. 
For I hold you in no way to blame. It is the gods 
who are responsible. ' ' On hearing these reassur- 
ing words, Helen replies with humility : 

Respected art thou in my sight, and greatly revered. 
Oh that I had chosen death before I followed thy son 
hither, leavmg my home, my friends, my darling child, 
and the lovely companionship of equals! But these 
things were not to be, and therefore I waste away in 
tears. The man of whom you ask is the son of Atreus, 
the wide-ruling Agamemnon, both a good king and a 
mighty warrior, the brother-in-law of poor shameless me, 
if it is not all a dream. 

After pointing out and naming various leaders 
among the Greeks, she looks throughout the army 
in vain for two and says : 

But two chieftains of the people, Castor and Pollux, 
my own brothers, I cannot see. Either they did not come 
from divine Lacedaemon, or else they have indeed fol- 
lowed the army, but are imwiUing to enter the ranks of 
the warriors, fearing the many disgraces and reproaches 
which are mine. 

Then the poet adds : ^^Thus she spake, but already 
the life-giving earth had covered them there in 
Lacedaemon, in their own native land." The 



184 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

pathos of the thought that her poor brothers did 
not dare to join their fellows, because they could 
not endure the stories of her shame, makes it hard 
for anyone to censure her. In this brief intro- 
duction of Helen we see that she was not idling 
her time away, but was hard at work; that she 
was beautiful, so beautiful that even the men who 
were sorely afflicted could not blame others for 
waging a war in her behalf ; that she herself was 
deeply conscious of her g^t, did not put the 
fault on others, and said of the brother of her 
husband, the leader of the forces which were 
warring to punish her own and Paris' crime, **He 
is both a good king and a mighty warrior. ' ' After 
such gracious words as these we, like the old men 
on the walls of Troy, cannot find it in our hearts 
to chide her. 

This scene shows also, by the definite infor- 
mation which Helen has retained of the various 
Greek generals, that she is a woman of intellectual 
power. Helen is no silly beauty, but she is as 
clever as she is fair. After Paris' fiasco in the 
duel with Menelaus, she was so disgusted with him 
that she would have spumed him except for the 
brutal intervention and the threats of Aphrodite. 
Poor Helen said to the goddess: ^^I cannot go to 
him, it would be a shame, and all the women of 
Troy would despise me forever. I am sad enough 
as it is. ' ' The goddess answered : * * Woman, anger 
me not, lest in my rage I abandon thee, and my 
wrath shall be as ruthless as my love has been 



GODS AND HEROES 185 

strong. I will put cruel strife between the Greeks 
and the Trojans, and thou thyself shalt perish by 
an evil fate. ' ' Under such great pressure, Helen 
can hardly be blamed for yielding. Later during 
that same day Hector came to the home of Paris 
in order that he might shame him into bravery. 
Helen took the blame upon herself, and came to 
the conclusion that perhaps, after all, she and 
Paris have been involved in this evil fate that 
she and he may in coming ages furnish a song for 
generations yet unborn. 

After the death of Hector, when the corpse is 
brought home, she takes her stand beside the bier 
and laments him thus : 

Hector, thou art the dearest to me of all the kins- 
men of my husband, and Paris is my husband. . He it 
was who brought me here to Troy. that I had died 
before that day. Now twenty years have gone since I 
left my native land. In all these years I have heard not 
one harsh or cruel word from thee, and even when others 
of this household chided me, thou wouldst check them 
with thy loving kindness and thy gentle words. I in 
my anguish weep for thee and my ill-fated self, for no 
one now in Troy is kind to me and they gaze at me with 
angry looks. 

Helen appears in but three books of the Iliad, 

and each time her stay is very brief. She is 

beautiful, full of remorse, but she thinks only P^c»ii»r c^^fKv#Hty 

of herself. When she is at work with her needle 

it is to embroider or weave scenes of those battles 

which had been fought for her sake. Even the 

purpose of the war was to glorify her in song, 

and when she weeps for Hector, she is thinking 

only of Helen. 



186 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

Ten years elapse before we see her again. 
Hard as it was for the poet to create a proper 
atmosphere for the introduction of Helen in the 
niady the diflSculties are much increased in the 
Odyssey. In these ten years she has had some- 
thing of a career. Paris was slain, she was taken 
over by Deiphobus, and then, at length, fell into 
the arms or the hands of her outraged husband, 
who after many years and much wandering 
brought her back to Sparta. A woman of such 
a past must be hard to restore to favor, but — and 
this is quite as serious in the sphere of beauty — 
she is also ten years older; thirty years have 
elapsed since she eloped with Paris. Homer must 
recreate the spell of loveliness despite her career 
and despite her age. 

The Odyssey has the following setting for her 
introduction. Telemachus and a friend have come 
to Sparta in search of tidings of Odysseus, and 
Menelaus entertains them not knowing who they 
are. They look with wonder upon the grandeur 
of his palace, whereupon he tells them that all 
this magnificence is naught, for he has lost many 
friends, whose loss is indeed bitter, but there is 
one who, more than all beside, makes him loathe 
his food and sleep. That one is Odysseus, the 
remembrance of whose loss fills his days with 
sorrow. Just at this moment Helen, as beautiful 
as Artemis, comes into the room, attended by 
maidens who carry her wool and her spinning — 
for Helen is still the same active house-wife she 



GODS AND HEROES 187 

was at her first appearance in the Iliad. She 
modestly turns toward Menelaus, asking him the 
names of his guests and saying that she is startled 
by the resemblance she observes between one of 
the young men and Odysseus. ' ' This must be the 
boy Telemachus, whom Odysseus left a mere babe 
in his home, when you Achaeans went under the 
walls of Troy for the sake of me, poor shameless 
one.*' Helen had seen little of Odysseus, and 
then under difficulties, yet she marks at a glance 
the features of the father in the face of the son; 
whereas Menelaus, who had lived with Odysseus 
for many years and had dined and conversed with 
Telemachus, has failed to see the resemblance. 
It is then learned that one of the young men is 
indeed Telemachus, whereupon they all burst into 
tears, sad for the absence of Odysseus. Helen 
then throws into the bowl from which they are 
drinking an Egyptian drug capable of causing 
f orgetf ulness of sorrow. This drug may well have 
been a poetic description of the charm of her pres- 
ence. Afterwards she relates an exploit of Odys- 
seus in which she had helped him to slay many in 
the streets of Troy. She begins by saying: '*Zeus 
gives good to one and evil to another, for he is 
all powerful, *' and ends with the words: **My 
heart was set to return home, and I bewailed that 
infatuation which Aphrodite had brought upon 
me, when she took me away from my own country, 
away from my child, my home, and my husband, 
a husband lacking in nothing, deficient neither in 



/ 



\ 

 



188 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

wisdom nor in beauty." Menelaus, blissfully 
nodding, exdaims, ''That is exactly right, dear 
wife, you have told the truth." We see by this 
that she is fuUy restored to her home and to the 
affections of her husband. Menelaus then tells a 
story of her devemess, when she came up to the 
wooden horse and imitated the voices of the wives 
of various Achaeans, while the men inside almost 
ruined the plot in their eagerness to answer her. 
At her last appearance she presents a robe 
to Telemachus as he is leaving Sparta for Ithaca, 
*'A robe for his future wife to wear, a memento 
of the hands of Helen" — evidently a robe she had 
made herself. Just as Telemachus is driving 
away an eagle swoops down and seizes a tame 
goose from the yard, while men and women run 
shouting to the rescue. The eagle flies with its 
prey far away to the right. Menelaus, asked 
what this omen may foretell, is mute and helpless, 
but Helen interprets it thus: 

Listen to me and I will prophesy as the gods put it 
into my mind, and as I think it will be fulfilled. Just 
as this bird sweeping down from its aerie in the moun- 
tains has seized this fowl as it fed in the yard, so 
Od3rsseus, after much wandering and many sorrows, will 
return home and be avenged, or even now he may be 
at home and be in the very act of bringing ruin to all 
the suitors. 

With these words Helen disappears never to 
reappear or to speak again. She is still the same 
as when, a generation earlier, a goddess had pic- 
tured her to a Trojan shepherd as ^^the fairest 



GODS AND HEROES 189 

woman in the world. " On each appearance Helen 
is indnstrions, self-centered, beautifnl, and ex- 
tremely brilliant. She sees in an instant things 
which Menelaus conld hardly see in an hour, or 
conld not see at all. Menelans in the Iliad con- 
stantly needed the protection and guidance of his 
stronger brother, Agamemnon, and in the Odyssey 
he plainly echoes the sentiments of his wife. He 
is a kindly, generous gentleman, but he is not 
shrewd and he is not interesting. He must have 
been poor company for so clever a woman as 
Helen. Poor Helen, limited to his society, with 
no magazines and no fashion-plates, must have 
craved something different, and so, from pure 
love for excitement, she followed Paris. Homer's 
portrait of Helen is a perfect picture. In spite 
of her few and brief appearances there is hardly 
a more vivid and well-defined portrait in the 
world *s literature. All the poets who have written 
since Homer have been unable to add perma- 
nently a single feature, or to change a single line. 
The Helen of the world 's imagination is the Helen 
of Homer, and every verse which tells of her 
blends in making that perfect picture^ 

Though all we know 'of Helen is given in a 
few verses, the hero of the Odyssey is the most 
often seen and the most fully described of all the 
characters adopted or created by Homer. In the 
niad the poet makes his theme the wrath of 
Achilles, but Achilles is only one, although the 
greatest, of a large group of mighty warriors. 



190 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

Diomede, Ajax, Odysseus, Patroclus, as well as 
Teucer, Idomeneus, and Nestor gain immortality, 
not by association with the hero, but in their own 
right in that poem. Odysseus was one of the 
prominent actors in that earlier poem, was called 
by his own name or that of his father not less 
than one hundred and thirty times, was honored 
in the councils, the battles, and the games, so that 
the poet of the Odyssey took a hero with whom 
the audience of the Iliad was already familiar. 
In the Odyssey he dominates all scenes, those 
where he is present and those from which he is 
absent, and the gatherings in Olympus or in 
Ithaca have meaning only as they refer to him. 
The first task set for Odysseus in the Iliad was 
the return of the young woman Chryseis to her 
father. In its execution he showed his diplomatic 
skill and quickly brought back the good-will of 
the priest without compromising the honor or the 
dignity of his king. His adroitness in such mat- 
ters made him the natural choice of the Greeks, 
when, later, they sent an embassy to appease the 
angry Achilles.- The absolute control of himself 
and his language is repeatedly shown in the 
Odyssey, but especially in his speech to Nausicaa, 
when he had been cast ashore, naked, on the land 
of the Phaeacians. No one could have been less 
presentable than was Odysseus when he first met 
the eyes of the maiden, yet he spoke in such win- 
ning and dignified language as to convince her 
that he was a gentleman whom she might feed, 



GODS AND HEROES 191 

clothe, and admit to her own city. When later he 
came into the presence of Alcinous and Arete, 
clad in the clothing Arete herself had made and 
which she recognized, even in this rather onheroic 
situation, he talked to them in such a manner that 
they too were convinced of his merits, and prom- 
ised to send him safely home. 

Odysseus had perfect control of himself and 
could think calmly in a crisis and on the instant. 
After Agamemnon had made his foolish speech 
in which he urged the Greeks to abandon the 
struggle, thinking thereby to shame them into 
bravery, they took him at his word and started 
pell-mell on a rush to the ships, eager to hasten 
home. All seemed lost, and the leaders were 
panic-stricken. But Odysseus at once saw the 
danger and knew how to meet it. With energetic 
measures, instantly applied, he changed their 
spirit so completely that those who a few moments 
before thought only of flight were now eager for 
the fray. Later, when he and Ajax were wrestling 
for a prize, he whispered to his burly opponent 
to make it a sham contest and to let him throw 
him, advice which Ajax stupidly followed. But 
when it came the turn of Odysseus to fall he did 
not reciprocate. This same cunning and self- 
control saved him from the cave of the Cyclops, 
kept his ship from the Laestrygonian harbor 
where all the other ships were lost, and kept 
him from being too early discovered when he 
returned, in beggar's disguise, to Ithaca. It was 



192 THE UNITY OP HOMBR 

this same native shrewdness which made him 
remove the bodies of the slain Thracians from 
before the horses of Bhesns, lest the horses, mi- 
used to the presence of corpses, should be terrified 
at the strange sight and rain his own and 
Diomede's adventure. 

p Odysseus was not, like Achilles, a rash warrior 
who took risks for their own sake. His bravery 
was tempered with caution. Hence he did not 
seek a battle with Hector, Aeneas, Glaucus, or 
Sarpedon ; but in time of real need nothing could 
daunt him or restrain him. When Agamemnon 
and Diomede had been wounded and forced to 
retire, Odysseus did not shrink from facing the 
Trojans, many of whom he slew. In the Odyssey, 

'•' too, he preferred to meet danger vicariously. 
He sent companions to find out who the Lotus- 
eaters were, to investigate the nature of the 
Laestrygonians, and to explore the island of Circe. 
When, however, Eurylochus returned from the 
haunts of Circe and reported the loss of his com- 
panions, Odysseus did not weigh the danger nor 
hesitate ; in spite of the pleadings of Eurylochus, 
he set out at once and alone to rescue them. 

Odysseus had an enormous appetite and 
seemed always ready to eat. The fact that he 
ate three times in one night, that night when he 
and Diomede made the foray on the Thracians, 
has caused anguish of soul to the critics. When 
Achilles threw off his anger after the death of 
Patroclus, and after his mother had brought him 



«ir 



GODS AND HEROES 193 

his new and divine armor, he was eager to begin 
the battle at once, but Odysseus said: ^'Feed the«| 
men, for food is both strength and bravery. 
Hungry men cannot fight." This seemed too 
prosaic for the high-spirited son of Thetis, who 
replied: *' Hungry or not, let them fight 1 It is 
no time to think of food in such an hour as this. ' * 
Odysseus insisted, however, that hungry troops 
cared little for glory. The men were fed and -^ 
glory was permitted to wait. In the Odyssey he 
was always ready for food. Once he told Alcinous 
that he must excuse him from other things and let 
him eat, ^^for there is nothing more imperious 
than a hungry stomach, which always bids one 
remember it. ' * 

Odysseus allowed neither his enthusiasm nor 
his emotions to make him forget the main chance, 
and that main chance was the advantage of Odys- 
seus. The Phaeacians gave him a banquet, setting 
before him a fine piece of pork. Odysseus, in 
order to show his esteem for Demodocus, cut off 
a portion for him, but the poet slyly adds: **He 
cut off a piece for the bard, but the larger piece 
he kept for himself." One of the Phaeacians, 
Euryalus, had deeply offended Odysseus by say- 
ing that he resembled a trader rather than an 
athlete. Then when the mistake was discovered 
he begged pardon of Odysseus, and in token of 
reconciliation offered him his beautiful sword 
with hilt of silver and scabbard of ivory. Odys- 
seus did not tell him to keep his sword, but 



194 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

offered this prayer instead : ' ' May the gods grant 
you prosperity and may you never miss this 
sword!" When the Phaeacians invited him to 
remain a little longer so that they might pre- 
pare a suitable gift, although he was most eager 
to return home, he replied: **I would gladly stay 
a year, if you should spend that time in getting 
, ready a suitable gift. ' ' The Phaeacians set Odys- 
' sens ashore in his native land, while he was still 
asleep, and placed his gifts by his side. And the 
first thing he did upon awaking was to count those 
gifts to see if they had left him everything. When 
Penelope told the suitors that suitors should bring 
gifts and should not consume the substance of 
another, Odysseus sat by and grinned to think 
that she was trying to increase his store. 

Odysseus was the favorite of Athena and her 
human counterpart. She aroused him to stay the 
flight of the Greeks in B, sent hiin an omen in K, 
helped him in the games, encouraged his son to 
seek tidings of him, assisted him when among the 
Phaeacians, was the first to meet him on his return 
to Ithaca, helped him slay the suitors, and brought 
about the final reconciliation with his people. 
Odysseus must have been a fine fellow, as he had 
the confidence and respect of his associates. He 
was appointed to restore the daughter to the aged 
priest at the beginning of the Iliad, was selected 
to measure the ground for the duel (F), and 
was the chosen ambassador of the Greeks to 
appease the anger of Achilles. Achilles referred 



GODS AND HEROES 195 

to him as one of those he loved the most, Diomede 
selected him as his companion on the perilous 
night foray, and in the foot-race his comrades 
cheered him and wished him to win. This little 
touch shows his popularity with the men who 
knew him, and shows that he was no sneak. In 
the Odyssey all the honest people loved him and 
a favorite description of him was, ''For he was 
as kind as a father. '' Twenty years had not 
dulled the affections of his wife nor the admira- 
tion of the elders among his people. The old 
nurse, Eurydeia, the swineherd, Eumaeus, the 
neatherd, Philoetius, and even the old dog, Argus, 
still yearned for their kind and considerate mas- 
ter. Not only the members of his own household 
loved him, but we learn from the lips of Nestor 
and Menelaus that he was the especial object of ^ 
their deepest affections. In Homer it is the 
nobility of Odysseus quite as much as his shrewd- 
ness which exalts him. The Odysseus of the 
Odyssey is the Odysseus of the Hiad ; in the latter 
poem he is given greater prominence, but the 
features are the same. In the Iliad we have him 
as a part of a group, while in the Odyssey we have 
a ** close-up picture** of the same hero. "" 

The Homeric unity of character shown in 
Helen and Odysseus appears equaUy distinct in 
Nestor, Penelope, Ajax, Patroclus, Menelaus, or 
in any of the rest. Each actor is consistent 
throughout and each shows marks and traits 
found only in himself. How did this unity arise t . 



196 THB UNITY OP HOMER 

Those who deny unity to Homer and who assume 
a multitude of authors for the Homeric poems 
say that these characters were created by tradi- 
tion and that the imity is due to various poets 
working under a common impulse to a common 
end. We have a tradition of Odysseus outside of 
Homer, a tradition fairly consistent and appear- 
ing not only in the epic cycle but in the drama 
as well. In this un-Homeric tradition Palamedes 
won such fame at Troy that Odysseus from jeal- 
ousy resolved to destroy him. With this in mind 
he had a letter written to Palamedes as if from 
Priam, then had it concealed in the victim's tent, 
whereupon he accused him of treason and urged 
that the tent be searched. The letter was found, 
the treason established, and poor Palamedes 
was put to death. Another tradition was that 
Palamedes was told that there was much hidden 
treasure in a well, and he was induced to go down 
in search of it. Odysseus and Diomede then threw 
stones into the well and thus slew him. In the 
Ajax of Sophocles this same Odysseus is pictured 
as an lago of villainy who brought about the mad- 
ness and the suicide of the great Ajax, son of 
Telamon, and in the Philoctetes of Sophocles he 
avows his own baseness and duplicity before the 
helpless invalid, but becomes a coward when that 
invalid has control of his bow. Tradition did, in 
a measure, create an Odysseus, but it is not the 
Odysseus of Homer. The Odysseus of tradition 
is hardly more than the personification of cunning 



GODS AND HEROES 197 

and cruelty. There is nothing in this Odysseus 
which would make his companions cheer him in 
the games and desire him to win. Homer's 
Odysseus is his own creation. 

There is rarely a consistent Greek tradition. 
The same story may appear in as many different 
forms as there are men to tell it. Each of the 
three great writers of Attic tragedy, Aeschylus, 
Sophocles, and Euripides, wrote a play on the 
bringing of the lame Philoctetes from Lemnos 
to Troy. The oracle had foretold that Troy could 
not be taken without the help of the bow of this 
outraged archer, and the manner in which he was 
induced to forego his anger and to come to the 
help of those very leaders who had so brutally 
abandoned him in his wretchedness forms the plot 
of each of these dramas. Yet each account differs 
from the other two. 

In Aeschylus ' play Odysseus was commissioned 
to bring Philoctetes to Troy. He walked boldly 
into his presence, telling Philoctetes, who failed 
to recognize him, that Agamemnon and his chief 
foe, Odysseus, were both dead. Philoctetes was 
seized with a paroxysm and while he was in that 
condition Odysseus secured possession of the bow. 
As the play of Aeschylus is preserved only in 
fragments, a part of even this brief outline is 
conjectural. In the play of Euripides both Odys- 
seus and Diomede were sent to bring Philoctetes. 
Odysseus cajne as if an exile driven out by the 
malice of Odysseus, who had caused the death of 



198 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

Philoctetes' friend, Palamedes. A Trojan em- 
bassy meanwhile arrived and urged Philoctetes 
to join their side, since his own Greek countrymen 
had so basely deserted him. Thereupon Philoc- 
tetes swooned and was treated with great kind- 
ness by Odysseus, who finally persuaded him to 
forego his anger and join the Greeks. This play 
is also fragmentary and the plot can not be re- 
stored with confidence. In the play by Sophocles 
it was the youthful Neoptolemus and not Diomede 
who went with Odysseus, and the deception prac- 
ticed by Odysseus in the versions of Aeschylus 
and Euripides was here the work of Neoptolemus, 
the son of Achilles, while Odysseus did not dare 
to face Philoctetes, the thing he was made to do 
by both the others. 

In these three dramas we have the same gen- 
eral theme presented in three different ways by 
three different men, all for an audience in the 
Dionysiac theater, in the same city, and within 
a period of hardly more than fifty years. These 
same three tragedians wrote plays on the death of 
Agamemnon, of Clytaemnestra, and of Aegisthus, 
in which the details are quite as much at variance 
as they are in the story of • Philoctetes. Their 
utter failure to give anything approaching unity 
of character to the several actors is clearly shown, 
likewise, in the manner in which they portray 
Electra. Each of their tragedies in which that 
young woman plays a leading part is fortunately 
preserved entire. In Aeschylus Electra comes 



GODS AND HEROES 199 

upon the scene weeping for the loss of her father, 
the baseness of her mother, and most of all for 
the absence of her brother Orestes. When her 
brother returns she leaves the leadership in plan- 
ning and in action to him, and he makes and 
executes his own designs. In this play Orestes 
slays both his own mother and her paramour, 
Aegisthus. The famous recognition scene is based 
on the hair and the footprints of the young man. 
In Sophocles Electra maintains the leadership 
throughout, even after Orestes* return. He is 
only secondary. It is Electra who is the dominant 
character and who decides her own course as well 
as her brother 's. Again in Aeschylus, Aegisthus is 
the first to be slain and Clytaemnestra knows that 
she too is doomed when she learns of his death. 
In the Electra of Sophocles, Clytaemnestra is mur- 
dered first and Aegisthus is led to believe that her 
corpse is the corpse of Orestes. When he looks 
at the face he sees that he has been deceived and 
realizes that his own doom is at hand, and this 
doom immediately follows. In the Electra of 
Euripides, Electra is no longer an occupant of 
the palace, but the wife of a peasant, and she 
sunxmons her mother^ pretending that she is about 
to give birth to a child. Meanwhile Orestes in the 
guise of a Thessalian traveler has slain Aegisthus, 
and the corpse is brought to the farm to Electra. 
Clytaenmestra comes in answer to the summons 
of her daughter, and is slain by the thrust of a 
sword driven by both Orestes and Electra. In 



200 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

this play Electra recognizes her brother not by 
his hair or his feet, but by a scar over the eye. 
Electra in the play of Euripides is coarse and 
cruel, entirely unlike the Electra of either of the 
other dramatists. 

These dramas show clearly that the Greeks 
were not offended either by diversity in treatment 
of the same story or of the sajcne character, and 
we are justified in believing that they would never 
have rewritten or revised Homer in order to 
make Homer's actors or Homer's stories uniform 
throughout. This lack of uniformity in the pic- 
ture of Electra as portrayed by the tragedians 
is exactly like the various pictures of King David 
in different parts of the Bible. The books of 
Samuel and the Chronicles are by common consent 
traditional books. In Samuel David is described 
as a lustful and cruel king, who took wives from 
their husbands and even caused the death of one 
of his subjects for the sake of the possession of 
his wife. But when Chronicles pictures the reign 
and life of David that monarch has not a single 
fault. He is a king ruling in purity and righteous- 
ness — a totally different picture of the same man.' 
The most superficial study of the four gospels 
which tell the story of the life of Jesus will show 
that each one of these writers saw Jesus in a 
different way from all the others. These accounts 
are not contradictory; they were written from 
different points of view. 

* I owe this remark about David to Professor F. G. Eiaelen. 



OODS AND HEROES 201 

This total inability of two writers to see the 
same characters in the same way is finely illus- 
trated by the history of the story of Don Quixote. 
After the appearance of the First Part and its 
great popularity, a clever writer undertook to con- 
tinue the story and published what was assumed 
to be the Second Part, but he failed so cojnpletely 
in catching the spirit of Cervantes or in making 
his knight like the origiual that the attempt was 
an utter failure. Schiller and Goethe also were 
men of genius of high order. They lived much 
together and knew each other 's modes of thought. 
Schiller communicated to his friend the outlines 
of a play, even the details of the plot, but he did 
not live to finish it. Goethe undertook to carry 
out the idea in the spirit of Schiller, but he found 
that it could not arouse his genius, that he could 
not get into the spirit of his friend, and he felt it 
necessary to abandon the attempt.^ 

It is well-known that the Greek tragedians 
repeated the same theme continually. The identi- 
cal titles of many plays reappear in the lists of 
the works of the different writers, yet in Homer 
no scene and no story is repeated. I do not refer 
to mere repetitions by messengers or to sum- 
maries, such as Achilles' words to his mother, 
or the account Telemachus gave of his journey. 
All the characters in Homer are imif orm, they 
have life and individuality, but no scene from 
the Hiad is repeated in the Odyssey. The same 

^Beferred to by Bothe, Odyssee ala IHeJUung, 202. 



202 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

audience in Athens could see the same person 
represented in entirely different and contradic- 
tory aspects and could hear the same story retold 
with different features and with different actors. 
Who gave this unity to Homeric characters and 
who kept the same story from being retold f 
Certainly not a group of men who felt no shock 
at hearing contradictions and at seeing repeti- 
tions. Who gave the poetry of Homer this unity 
of character and this unity of action? There is 
but one answer: The unity of character which 
pervades the poetry of Homer must be due to the 
fact that each actor sprang from a single brain, 
a brain which pictured each individual with such 
vividness and such distinctness that incongruity 
and contradictions were impossible. These clear 
and distinct outlines are the creation of a single 
mind ; they are not a composite picture by several 
masters. In all composite pictures the centers are 
fairly distinct, the edges are blurred and confused. 
It is the clearness of the edges which proves the 
unity of Homer. 

This unity of character is expressed in a style 
which stands entirely alone. Matthew Arnold 
said of this style: ^' Homer has not Shakespeare's 
variations. Homer always composes, as Shakes- 
peare composes at his best. The compelling argu- 
ment for Homeric imity is that the poem has 
the magic stamp of a master and that stamp is 
the grand style.*** A critic so competent and a 

s On Translaiinff Homer, Lecture II. 



GODS AND HEROES 203 

poet so great as Shelley said: ^'As a poet Homer 
must be acknowledged to excel Shakespeare in the 
truth, the harmony, the sustained grandeur, the 
satisfying completeness of his images."" Greek 
hexameters were written for a thousand years and 
more after Homer, but none of these hexameters 
remind us of him. We never, except to glorify him, 
think of Homer, when we read Hesiod, ApoUonius, 
Quintus, or Nonnus, yet all of them wrote in his 
meter and in his dialect. All the great mass of 
poetry known as the epic cycle seems to have been 
composed in something like the Homeric manner 
and on themes resembling Homer's themes. Still 
no one has ever quoted a single verse nor referred 
to a single scene from any poem of the entire 
cycle as illustrating either high merit or poetic 
excellence. It is beyond credulity to suppose that 
a group of poets should all have written in the 
same grand style, that all their work should have 
been collected into the Iliad and the Odyssey, and 
that by chance not another poet whose works 
accidentally fell to any other poem should have 
attained that style. The one poet whom we know 
who lived closest to the time of Homer is Hesiod, 
and we are positively certain that the author of 
the Works and Days could have written no one of 
the great scenes of either the Iliad or the Odyssey. 
It is easier to believe that Shakespeare wrote 
King Lear, Macbeth, Hamlet, Othello, and The 
Merchant of Venice than that five men lived at that 

« Quoted by Professor Smyth, Columbia Lectures on Greek 
Literature, 46. 



204 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

time, each capable of writing one of these plays. 
Hamlet is the best possible evidence of Shakes- 
peare's ability to write Othello. No otiier poet 
known to us was capable of writing the story of 
the ransom of the body of Hector except that 
poet who wrote also the parting of Hector and 
Andromache, the speeches of the embassy, the 
death of Hector, and the story of the Phaeacians. 
Other writers .might suggest Homer but no one 
of them could be mistaken for him. They could 
paraphrase him, parallel him, imitate him, but 
they have produced nothing which posterity has 
cared to place by the side of any of his great 
scenes. They might at times seem to catch the 
spirit of Homer, but they did not. They have 
enriched the world with no Nausicaa, no Eumaeus, 
and no Andromache. 

[Dr. Heinrich Spiees in his Mensohenart und Seldenttim m 
der Hicu suggested to me the idea of writing this chapter. I owe 
much to him for manj euggeetionB.] 



CHAPTER Vn 
HECTOR 

When Herodotus gave an account of the great 
series of struggles by which the Greeks drove out 
of Europe the forces of Asiatic despotism, he said 
that the purpose of his narrative was to preserve 
to the glorious actions of the Greeks and of the 
barbarians their due meed of praise. This eager- 
ness to preserve the glory of his enemies as well - • 
as that of his own countrymen was peculiarly 
Greek. Thucydides was the historian of that 
terrible war in which Athens lost her empire to 
the forces of Sparta, yet so impartially is the 
story told that except for one or two chance refer- 
ences it might be argued that the author was not 
an Athenian, for a Spartan general, Brasidas, 
seems to have been his favorite. This ability to l 
humanize the foe was entirely unknown to the 
Hebrew writers. Their enemies never appealed 
to their sympathies, and the various inhabitants 
whom they dispossessed of their homes seem 
never to have touched the pity nor to have aroused 
the better emotions of any of the sacred writers. 

Herodotus and Thucydides, in this impartial- "^ 
ity and in their appreciation of the virtues of 
their foes, were followers of Homer, who so 



206 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

graciously entered into the heart and the nobler 
sentiments of the enemy that it was a Trojan, not 
a Greek, who became the moral hero of the poem. 
Yet Homer was a Greek with all the sympathies 
and prejudices of a patriotic Greek. He never 
pictures any of his countrymen as begging for life 
or as taken prisoner; the death of a Greek is 
always avenged, the death of a Trojan but rarely ; 
and generally, when a Trojan falls, his name is 
given, but the slain Greeks are for the most part 
nameless.^ The Greeks advance to battle with 
perfect discipline and in quiet, while the Trojans 
move with confusion and tumult. The short 
victory which came to the Trojans was made 
necessary because of the determination of Zeus to 
honor Achilles. Even the Trojan success, there- 
fore, was for the purpose of giving greater glory 
to a Greek. The Trojans were at war because 
of the violation of the sacred obligations of guest- 
friendship, and hostilities were renewed by the 
treacherous wounding of Menelaus by Pandarus 
in defiance of most solemn oaths. Against this 
background of violated hospitality and perjured 
oaths Homer drew the character of Hector. 

In the early part of the poem this hero of the 
Trojan forces is not brought upon the stage nor 
given prominence. Long before we see him, how- 
ever, we know that he is to be the chief antagonist, 
the one whom the Greeks are most to fear. 

1 Frey, ''HektorV Bern Program 1895. There were slain 189 
named Trojans and 53 named Greeks. Hector slew 28 of these 
Oreeks. 



HECTOR 207 

Achilles in his anger swore that the Greeks would 
rue his absence on that day when many should 
fall at the hands of man-slaying Hector. Also, 
Agamemnon called the leaders of the Greeks 
together for sacrifice and prayed that Zeus grant 
him the power of burning that very day the halls 
of Priam and of bringing vanquished Hector to 
the dust. By the words of Achilles and the prayer 
of Agamemnon the poet was able to create the 
impression that Hector was a known and illus- 
trious warrior. We are not surprised therefore 
to find that, when the Trojans are first introduced, 
it is Hector on whom chiefly rests the protection 
of the city, nor to read in the Trojan Catalogue 
that * ' Great Hector of waving plume, the son of 
Priam, led the Trojans, and with him the best 
warriors eagerly armed themselves.^' 

When the opposing forces at last moved for- 
ward, as if to begin the struggle, Paris advanced 
in front of his own army challenging the best of 
the foe to meet him in single combat. At once 
Menelaus sprang forward, eager to avenge him- 
self on the defiler of his home, whereupon Paris 
drew back, terrified, into the ranks of the Trojans. 
Then Hector upbraided him with the words: 
*' Wretched Paris, fairest of form, woman-mad, 
deceiver, would thou hadst never been bom and 
hadst died unwed.'' He bitterly reproached him 
for his folly and his cowardice, and ended with 
the biting taunt: **But the Trojans are timidly 
lenient, or else ere this hadst thou put on a tunic 



208 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

of stone, for the ills thou hast wrought.'^ These 
were the first words spoken by Hector. They 
show in advance that he had no sympathy for 
the course pursued by Paris and no heart in the 
war. Paris was driven to renew the challenge^ 
and the duel was prepared on the condition that 
the winner should take Helen and all her posses- 
sions, the Trojans continue to live in Troy, and 
the Greeks return to their own country. Hector 
was determined to bring peace at any price. He 
felt that the war was founded on dishonor. 

Paris proved a poor champion. He was res- 
cued from the fight by Aphrodite, and Menelaus 
was left alone, a victor, on the field of honor. 
Then Pandarus, a Trojan ally, treacherously 
wounded Menelaus, the solemn oaths were vio- 
lated, and the Trojans added to their infamy by 
rushing to battle and making the treachery of 
Pandarus their own. The Trojan cause was thus 
loaded with a double guilt : the rape of Helen and 
\ the baseness of Pandarus. 

The first mention we have of Hector in the 
battle that ensued is in the verse, **The Trojan 
leaders drew back, even the mighty Hector fled.'' 
It is highly suggestive that at the first appearance 
of this champion on the field, he should be in 
retreat. It was he who had shamed Paris into 
playing the man; it was he who had conducted 
the negotiations which led to the truce and the 
oaths. But, outraged by the conduct of Paris and 
the treachery of his own people, his spirit was 



HECTOR 209 

gone and he had not the heart to fight. The 
Greeks seemed on the point of winning, even 
without the help of Achilles, when Sarpedon 
shamed Hector into action. He accused him of 
enticing the allies to undertake the struggle for 
Troy and the Trojans while he himself stood 
basely aside, neither fighting nor inspiring others 
with valor. Hector made a feeble effort to play 
the man, but he did not enter the fighting again 
until Ares joined him and forced him into the 
struggle. The little glory he then won was not 
his !L, it was share! Jth the god of war. 

Soon he dropped out of sight, and the Trojans 
were on the point of retreating, when Helenus, the 
seer, suddenly advised Hector to leave the battle, 
go to the city, and tell his mother and the women 
of Troy to appease Athena by offering gifts to 
that angry goddess. Immediately he ceased fight- 
ing and made this address to his troops: **Te 
proud-spirited Trojans and ye illustrious allies, 
be men and think of your impetuous courage while 
I depart to Ilium that I may bid the elders and 
the women to offer sacrifices, to the immortal 
gods. ' * Thereupon he left his hard-pressed men. 
Surely it was an astounding thing for a champion 
to leave his men in the moment of greatest danger, 
that he might himself carry a simple message. 
He might have sent Helenus with orders to repeat 
in the city the advice Helenus had just given to 
him, or he might have sent the least important 
person in the army. It was a poetic, not a mili- 



^ 



210 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

tary, consideration, which induced Homer to nse 
Hector as a messenger. He wished to present a 
scene from domestic life; Hector was needed for 
that scene and therefore was spared f rcnn the 
battle. 

The account of his mission to the city, his 
meeting with his mother, the contrast between him 
and Paris, the words with Helen, and, above aU, the 
scene between the wife, the husband, and the little 
son, is generally regarded as the very greatest 
triumph of literary genius. The words with which 
Hector addressed his wife are very significant: 
**This I know in heart and soul that a day will 
come when sacred Troy shall fall and Priam and 
the people of Priam with good ashen spear." 
The sadness of these words is deepened from the 
fact that they are the very words spoken by 
Agamemnon when he perceived that Menelaus 
had been shot by Pandarus in defiance of the 
oaths. We see that Hector has no heart and no 
hope in the struggle, that he feels that the gods 
are justly against his own people. 

Although this parting scene is rated as of high 
' merit by all lovers of poetry, it is almost imiver- 
sally rejected by the critics as a late intrusion 
which destroys the effect and the harmony of the 
whole. That this parting scene should not be 
the final parting and the last farewell seems in 
their eyes a supreme poetic absurdity. Hector, 
according to the present Iliad, returned at the end 
of this day's fighting to his home and wife, that 



HECTOR 211 

is, he spent the night after the parting, the night 
after the first day's fighting, presumably the 
twenty-second in the story of the Iliad, within the 
city. He seems also to have been in Troy most 
of the two following days and nights. The success 
of the Trojans in the second day's fighting, the 
twenty-fifth day of the Iliad, induced him to 
encamp near the place of combat and to remain 
outside the walls. On the following day Patrodus 
was slain and Achilles was kept from fighting 
until his mother could bring him new armor. 
Hector spumed the wise advice of Polydamas to 
return within the walls. He remained that night 
on the plain, and was slain by Achilles on the 
following day. Thus Hector died on the twenty- 
seventh day of the action of the Iliad, or five days 
after the scene of parting. Of the five intervening 
nights three seem to have been spent in the city, 
without doubt in his own home, and two outside 
the walls not far from the camp of the Greeks. 

No doubt every reader is somewhat surprised 
to find that Hector and Andromache meet again 
after the scene of parting. The higher critics see 
in this account a contamination of two or more 
independent traditions. They believe that, in the 
original version, Hector parted from Andromache 
to meet the foe and die, and that he never saw 
his wife or son again. The difficulty they find is 
in the fact that this solemn parting is for only a 
few hours, while the real and final farewell is 
passed over in silence. Is this true to the highest 



212 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

and best standards of poetry T There is no truth 
in poetry which is not also truth in life. Most 
farewells in this world have, indeed, not been last 
farewells, and surely no husband and father ever 
went to dangerous battle without some such part- 
ing as this. The pathos of the scene was not 
changed by the accident that he may have re- 
turned though many of his companions fell. 

In the story of the Bible, the first person to 
prepare for death by giving his final blessing to 
his son and successor was Isaac. In that account 
(Genesis xxvn : 1 ff.) Isaac said he wished to bless 
his son and then to die. Clearly the thought of 
this patriarch was that his course had been run. 
But he did not die ; he was still alive when Jacob 
returned from serving Laban. Whether the story 
of Isaac was an actual fact or not, it was at least 
so regarded by the compilers and preservers of 
the narrative. It was no more necessary that 
Hector's fears should have been immediately ful- 
filled than that Isaac's blessing should have been 
followed by his death. After Hector had left his 
wife and had met Paris, the natural reaction set 
in and he told Paris what they would do when 
finally they were rid of the Greeks. Here he was 
mistaken, for he never lived to ** drink a cup of 
freedom in his halls. ' ' 

When Socrates was condemned to death he 
said to those who condemned him, *'I wish to 
prophesy to you, for I am now at that point where 
men especially foretell the future, when they are 



HECTOR 213 

about to die.^^ He then predicted that certain 
things would happen which never came to pass. 
The signal failure of this prophecy changed in 
no particular the impressive solenmity of the 
utterance. Would the grief of Penelope during 
those twenty years have been more bitter if at 
the end Odysseus had not returned? We can look 
at the outcome and anticipate sorrow or comfort 
thereby, but Penelope, Hector, and Andromache 
could not. The poet chose to paint their feelings 
rather than ours. This, it seems to me, is the 
essence of the whole matter: the poet preferred 
to picture the emotions of the actual participants 
in the action of the poem rather than those of the 
hearer or the reader. 

Homer has such a perfect parallel to this part- 
ing scene and its delayed fulfillment that it is 
strange these disintegrators overlooked it. The 
parting of Calypso and Odysseus is, on her part 
at least, closely akin to the one in the sixth book 
of the Iliad. How a modem poet would view this 
scene and where he would put it is illustrated by 
Stephen Phillips' Ulysses. In that play the pas- 
sionate farewells are spoken on the shore. Dur- 
ing their utterance Ulysses embarks, speaking his 
final words from the deck of the moving ship, 
which slowly fades from the sight of the dis-, 
tracted goddess. Where does Homer place the 
scene of these farewells! The story is found in 
the fifth book of the Odyssey. When Hermes 
warns Calypso that Zeus has decreed that Odys- 

f 



r 



214 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

seus is to leave her, the goddess reluctantly seeks 
him out and tries eagerly to induce him to remain 
with her and to become immortal ; but, failing in 
this, she bids him farewell : aif Si x^H^ ^*^ litinfi^ 
as beautiful and dignified words of parting as 
were ever spoken I We expect these to be her last 
words and that Calypso and Odysseus will part 
at once. But he does not leave. Instead he fol- 
lows her to her home, then for four days he works 
at his raft under her direction, and on the fifth 
he sails away without either of them speaking 
another word of farewell. It seems too deadly 
a parallel even to draw it, to say that Hector and 
Andromache bade farewell, that he was slain on 
the fifth day thereafter, and that the last parting 
was in silence; and that Odysseus and Calypso 
bade farewell, that he parted on the fifth day 
thereafter, and that the last parting was in silence. 
That one died on the fifth day, and the other 
parted on the fifth day after the farewells were 
spoken can hardly be more than an accident. The 
fact that neither parting scene was put at the 
moment of the last meeting must be no accident 
but poetic design. No careful student of Homer 

I can fail to grasp the poetic purpose in this. The 
poet constantly avoids scenes of too much tragic 
pathos or too great emotional intensity. When 
Hector met his death at the hand of Achilles, the 
wife was not a witness of that scene, although it 
was enacted in full view of the walls. She was 
busy with her work in her own room, and at the 



HECTOR 215 

very moment he was slain she was taking pride 
in a piece of artistic embroidery which she was 
then finishing. What an opportunity the poet had 
to place Andromache on the walls and **to tear 
a passion to tatters ' ' ! The poet shows his com- 
posure in the fact that we never hear the lamenta- 
tions of the woimded and the dying, and no soldier 
raises himself to his knees and breaks the death 
sobs and groans by some tearful message to father | 
or to mother. If the scene of parting in either 
case had been put at the moment of greatest 
danger or of intensest emotion it would have vio- 
lated that fine and dignified feeling which Homer 
everywhere observes. The placing of the parting 
words of Hector and Andromache and of Odys- 
seus and Calypso long before the last and final 1 
farewell is a perfect example of the Homeric and 
Hellenic reserve which is best expressed by the 
phrase, /iv^h ayav^ (** nothing too much"), and 
which induced the great Attic orators to dosej 
their speeches with calmest utterances. The same 
unerring poetic judgment shows itself in the part- 
ing of Hector and Andromache and in the parting 
of Odysseus and Calypso. 

Just at the moment when the Trojans seemed 
on the point of victory an eagle appeared on the 
left with a live snake in its talons. The snake 
kept striking the neck and breast of its captor 
until the eagle was forced to drop it and fly away, 
while the snake fell and squirmed within the ranks 
of the Trojans. The superstitious Polydamas 



216 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

immediately interpreted the omen as an order 
from Zeus to stop the battle, even though the 
battle was apparently hastening to so successful 
an issue. tZ adv J of Polydfma, w« wonder- 
fully like that given to Nicias, with such terrible 
results, so many centuries later in the harbor of 
Syracuse. Hector could not leave the battle for 
the sake of a bird and a snake, and he angrily 
replied to the seer: **You bid me put my trust 

. in wide-winged birds; I care not for them and 
I heed them not, whether they move toward the 
right and the rising sun or toward the left and 
the 'regions of darkness. One omen is best, to 
fight for native land. ' ' This utter break with the 
superstitions of his people must have shocked 
many, who were now terrified both by the omen 
and by Hector's evident want of faith. It is hard 
to grasp how modem this sentiment of Hector 
is and to remember that, centuries after Homer, 
great generals moved their armies according to 

iMie aspect of the liver of the sacrificial victims. 
Later Hector inspired his discouraged men with 
these splendid words: 

Fight all of you beside the ships and if any falls 
pierced with a javelin or thrust with a spear, may he 
meet his end knowing that it is glorious to fall fighting 
for one's native land, for then his wife and his children 
shall remain in safety, when the Oreeks have fled home 
in their ships. 

When, at last, Achilles, the son of a goddess, 
and protected by divine armor, came on the field. 
Hector knew that he was no match for him; but 



HECTOR 217 

his sense of honor and his love for his country 
would not permit him to seek his own safety back 
of the walls of the citv. Achilles shouted to him : 
* ' Come nearer that you may the sooner find your 
death.'* Hector without any illusions and with- 
out fear replied : * ' Son of Peleus, do not hope to 
frighten me with hard speech as if I were a child, 
since I too am able to utter coarse and reviling 
words. I know that thou art a mightier warrior 
and that thou art stronger far than 1.'* The 
greatness and the sadness of the course followed 
by Hector lay in this : that he was the champion 
of a cause which was distasteful to him, fighting 
a foe whom he regarded as his superior, and, most 
pathetic of all, he could not hope for the sympathy 
of the gods in a cause which he himself con- 
demned. He was in the war solely as a defender 
of his family and his state. For these he urged 
others to die and for them he himself gave his 
life. No other character in Homer resembles 
Hector in the motives which led him to action or 
in the gentle forgetfulness of self in his anxiety 
for others. It is a strange touch of the poet's 
genius that the last words spoken in regard to 
Hector should be from the lips of Helen, who had 
deserted her own home and who thought of others 
only in relation to her own happiness. 

The breadth of the poet 's sympathies is shown 
in the last verse of the Iliad: **Thus then they 
buried Hector the knight." The first verse of 
the poem named Achilles the Greek ; the last verse, 
Hector the Trojan. 



n 



J 



218 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

Hector has the distinction of being the only 
person who is named in every one of the twenty- 
four books of the Iliad Not even Achilles shares 
in this honor, since Achilles is not referred to 
directly or indirectly in the third book. Agamem- 
non, the Greek leader, is not mentioned in books 
twelve, twenty, and twenty-one. Though Hector 
is named in every book of the Iliad, he is not 
referred to in a single book of the Odyssey. He 
is solely the actor of a single poem and in that 
poem he is all important. Without a Hector the 
plot of the Iliad has no existence. There is no 
doubt that the character of Hector, with his seem- 
ing boldness and reputation so out of all propor- 
tion to his actual achievements, is at first sight 
extremely baffling. Mahaffy regards **the char- 
acter and position of Hector as the strongest and 
clearest inconsistency in the entire Hiad.'" He 
tries to bring harmony by assuming that, in the 
original Iliad, Hector was superior to all the 
Greeks excepting only Achilles, and he assumes 
that his various discomfitures before Ajax, 
Diomede, and the rest were added by bards to 
glorify these different Greeks at the expense of 
the original renown of Hector. 

Wilamowitz, throughout his Die Bias und 
Homer, assxmies that Hector has been taken over 
from some previous epic written exclusively in 
his honor, and he has named this poem Das 
Hektorgedicht. His contention is that the re- 
dactor of the Iliad took fragments from this epic 

* History of OreeJc Literatwre, I, 87. 



HECTOR 219 

and fitted thejn into the present poem. The 
simple fact that Hector is named in every book 
of the Iliad shows how essential he is to the plot 
and that without him there would be little action. 
If there ever was an original poem with Hector 
as its protagonist, it must have been written by 
a Greek bard to delight a Greek audience. Such 
a thing is no more probable than that a Spanish 
bard should have sung to Spanish audiences the 
glories of Drake, or that French bards should 
have delighted the people of France with the 
glorious exploits of the Crown Prince of Germany. 
I know that the Serbian bards sing of their own 
defeats at Kossovo, but it is in honor of their own 
leaders, and not to glorify the leaders of the 
Turks. A certain amount of praise for Hector 
was entirely proper from a Greek bard and before 
a Greek audience when, at the end, even that hero 
falls before a greater champion of their own. 
But a Greek song devoted exclusively to setting 
forth the glories of Hector and the discomfiture 
of the Greeks would have been an impossibility. 
Even when Hector is most valiant and achieves 
the most, we feel that he is a tethered hero, and 
that the poet resents his winning any glory at 
the expense of the Greeks. Generally a god is 
by his side; or the god really vanquishes the 
foe and then allows the glory to Hector. For, 
although Achilles puts on Hector all the blame 
for the loss of Patroclus, it was really Apollo 
who deserved that glory. 



220 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

Bethe,' following Dtiinmler/ has advanced the 
theory that most of the heroes of the Hiad were 
transferred to that poem from other songs or 
ballads and that in those original songs they had 
nothing to do with Troy. He argued that Hector 
was at one time a Theban hero and the fact that he 
appeared as fighting at Troy might be explained 
by the assumption that the original traditions of 
Hector were connected with a Troy in Attica 
and were later transferred to the Troad, This 
assumption is based on the fact that there was 

• 

a late tradition that Hector's grave was to be 
found at Thebes. Information in regard to the 
grave of Hector is given in a scholium to N 1 : 

For the Thebans being beset by misfortunes con- 
sulted the oracle in regard to a release, and the oracle 
told them that their woes would cease if the bones of 
Hector should be brought from Ophrynium of the Troad 
and buried in Thebes at a place designated by the 
oracle. They did this and their troubles ceased.' 

If Hector had really been a Theban hero, this 
must have been known from earliest times and 
would have been mentioned by Theban writers. 
We are fortunately able to test Theban tradi- 
tions by the writings of two early poets, Hesiod 
and Pindar. Hesiod outranks in point of antiquity 
any other writer except Homer, and Pindar, in 
the matter of time, has but few rivals. When to 
Pindar's antiquity is added the fact of his great 

« Neue Jahrhiidher, VII, 657, XIII, 1. 

* Studniezka, Kyrene, Anhang II. 

B ThiB oracle and scholium are diacuBsed hy Badtke, Hermes 
XXXVI, 35. 



HECTOR 221 

wealth of myth and of traditional allusions, he 
must be regarded as the very highest authority for 
all ancient traditions, especially those in any way 
connected with Thebes. These two poets, Hesiod 
and Pindar, are not only ancient, but, what is of 
far more importance in the present matter, they 
are strikingly independent of Homer, since they 
not only give vast stores of tradition not found 
in Homer, but even unhesitatingly contradict him.* 
We are confident therefore that in coming to these 
poets we come to uncontaminated sources and 
that respect for Homer will not have dried up the 
springs of Theban tradition in regard to Hector. 
Hector is never mentioned in any of the poetry 
assigned to Hesiod. The one Trojan warrior 
whom he names is Aeneas. He tells how Aeneas 
was conceived on the slopes of Mt. Ida, that is, 
Aeneas did not belong to a European, but to an 
Asiatic Troy. Hesiod, moreover, places in the 
Islands of the Blest those warriors who had gone 
in ships over the sea to recover the fair-haired 
Helen. This reference is most instructive, for 
it shows what the tradition was in European 
Greece. If it be granted that the Greek colonists 
or exiles took their old songs with them and sub- 
stituted new names for the old, putting an Asiatic 
Troy where once an Attic Troy had been, how are 
we to account for the fact that back there in the 

« ''Hector as a Theban Hero in the Light of Hesiod and 
Pindar," Am. Jour, of PhU., XXXV, 309 ff. 

I have elsewhere discussed the independence of Homer as shown 
in Hesiod and Pindar (''A Comparative Study of Hesiod and 
Pindar," Johns Hopkins Universitj dissertation, 1897). 



222 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

old home a BcBotian poet is singing of that same 
Asiatic Troyf Had Hesiod lived a few centuries 
later we could say that he was influenced by 
Homer; but we cannot accept that answer for a 
poet of marked independence of Homer, and who 
was almost if not quite a contemporary. Hesiod 
does not afford the slightest presumption that 
Hector in his day was regarded as a Theban hero. 
Pindar regarded Hector with unusual affec- 
tion and admiringly called him the ** invincible 
and steadfast pillar of Troy. ' * It is beyond doubt 
that this Troy was not in Attica but was the Troy 
of Asiatic Troad, for Pindar tells how glory 
bloomed for Hector by the waters of the Scaman- 
der. This poet mentions Hector by name no less 
than six times, yet he never suggests that he was 
in any way connected with Pindar ^s Thebes. He 
always makes him the defender and the glory of 
Asiatic Troy. Can any one in the face of this 
significant fact assert that Pindar knew that at 
one time this much admired Hector was the sup- 
port of his own beloved but ill-starred Thebes and 
that he suppressed that knowledge in silence T 
The knowledge of traditions shown in the works 
of Pindar proves that he would have known such 
a tradition if there had been one. The silence of 
Pindar in regard to a Theban Hector is therefore 
absolute proof that Hector was not then regarded 
as having any connection with Thebes. Not only 
does Pindar sing of no Hector except the Trojan 
Hector, but, what is far more important, he has 



HECTOR 223 

no knowledge of that Hector except as lie found 
it in Homer. It is easy to put one 's finger on some 
passage in the Hiad which justifies and explains 
every Pindaric reference to Hector. Pindar was 
no docile follower of Homer, as I have already 
shown. Besides differing from Homer, he often 
adds details not mentioned in the Hiad. For 
example (N. in, 52), he tells how Achilles, because 
of his unusual fieetness of foot, captured deer 
without nets or dogs. This is a touch not founded 
on Homer, yet in harmony with the phrase *'the 
swift-footed Achilles. ' ' Pindar adds no lines and 
gives no new features to the Homeric picture of 
Hector. The problem of Hector lies right at the 
heart of the Iliad. That hero has had no part in 
any previous * ' Hektorgedicht, " nor in any ex- 
ploits connected with Thebes. The first and only 
poem to give a portrait of him was the Hiad. 

In the first thousand lines of the Hiad, Achilles, 
Agamemnon, Telamonian Ajax, and the other 
Ajax, the son of Oileus, Idomeneus, Diomede, 
Nestor, Menelaus, Calchas, and Patroclus are 
introduced. The prominent Greek actors are 
marched across the stage at the very start; then 
when, in later scenes, they have played their parts, 
they reappear at the games, make their farewell 
bows, and disappear with no trace of bitterness 
from the ** wrath'* and no scars from their 
wounds. They are thus restored to the condition 
in which they were before the ** wrath'* began. 
Evidently Homer had the conception of the 



224 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

Greek heroes distinctly in mind from the start. 
Tradition for the most part had furnished their 
names and had already settled the fate of each. 
Agamemnon conld not die in battle, for his death 
was reserved for his return. Odysseus, Diomede, 
Nestor, and Menelaus must not fall at Troy, since 
their home-coming was a settled part of the epic 
saga; nor could any warrior win glory by slaying 
Ajax. The Greek leaders, as well as the fate 
of each, were already fixed by their own tradition, 
which, passing on from one generation to the 
next, would be definite and exact on the Greek 
side, but most vague and deficient concerning 
the Trojans. Homer had no knowledge of the 
Trojans except as Greek pride or patriotism pre- 
served it. Although the Greek leaders pass in 
review at once and we know who are to be the 
actors in subsequent events, there is no similar 
introduction of the Trojans. Except Hector and 
Priam, who are casually referred to in the first 
book, the Trojans are named only when they act. 
Paris does not enter and we have no inkling of 
his connection with the war until he meets Mene- 
laus in the duel. Aeneas, Glaucus, Sarpedon, 
appear first in E, Helenus makes his initial bow 
in Z, Dolon in K, Polydamas in A ; Coon, who forces 
Agamemnon to withdraw, and Socus, who wounds 
Odysseus, both win glory and death at their first 
appearance. Even Euphorbus, destined to have 
the great honor of wounding Patroclus, is not 
named previous to that exploit. The poem is 



HECTOR 225 

manifestly written from the point of view of the 
Greeks; the Trojans are introduced or created 
merely that the Greeks may have antagonists. 

Homer appears at his weakest in finding names 
and exploits for the Trojans. Tradition, Greek 
tradition, had supplied him with very few foreign 
names, and so, accordingly, nearly all the Tro- 
jans are fitted out with good Greek names, In 
book four is mentioned a Greek by the name 
of Chromius, then in later books four Trojans 
appear bearing that same name. One Greek and 
three Trojans have the Greek name Melanippus, 
one Greek and two Trojans are called Antiphus, 
two Trojans have the name Adrastus, two Asty- 
nous, two Ennomus, two Ophelestes, two Pylartes, 
two Thersilochus, and more than a score of the 
Trojans, such as Alastor, Medon, Noemon, Ores- 
tes, are identical in name with some Greeks of the 
poem. Tradition failed also to give Homer the 
name of Hector's wife, else she had not appeared 
with the Greek name Andromache. The same is 
true of his son Astyanax, as well as of his half- 
brothers and brothers, Deiphobus, Helenus, Poly- 
dorus, Polites, Antiphonus, and Agathon. 

Paris is the only one of the Trojan leaders who 
has an undisputed foreign name. It seems un- 
likely that tradition could have preserved the 
name of the son and forgotten the name of the 
father ; hence the tradition found in ApoUodorus 
(n, 6, 4), that Priajoi was at one time known as 
Podarces, is probably to be accepted as showing 



226 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

that the Greeks regarded Priam as a foreign name, 
which they rendered in their own speech with 
Greek equivalents. If Hector ever had the Trojan 
name Darins, Homer gives no hint that he knew 
it, and Hector never appears in Homer except 
under this good Greek name. Even had tradition 
told how a foreign prince with a foreign name 
sailed to Greece to entice Helen, it had not given 
the names of his companions. Accordingly the 
poet had the ship built by a Greek Phereclus, the 
son of the Greek, Tecton, whose sire in turn also 
was a Greek, Harmon. Hector, in name, dress, 
character, and all, is a Greek loaned to the enemy ; 
by these same tokens Paris is foreign throughout. 

My explanation for all the difficulties involved 
in an appreciation of the parts played by Hector 
and Paris in the action of the Hiad is this : Paris 
J was the traditional leader and champion of the 
Trojans, but for moral reasons could not be made 
the protagonist in the poem. The poet therefore 
degraded him and created a hero with sufficient 
nobility of character to win sympathy for his 
cause. Hector, as he appears in Homer, is the 
creation of the poet who conceived the idea of the 
Iliad; without Homer there would have been no 
traditions of Hector. 

The place of Paris in tradition and in Homer 
will be first considered. We know little of the con- 
tents of the Cyclic poems, yet we learn that Paris 
was the leading actor of the Cypria, that he was 
a person of sufficient importance to be called upon 



HECTOR 227 

to decide the contest of the goddesses^ that he took 
a fleet to Greece to secure Helen, and that on his 
return he was able to pillage the wealthy city of 
Sidon. All of this is in harmony with the Iliad, 
even if not definitely expressed. The deeds of no 
other Trojan find any place in the story of the 
Cypria. The phrase found in the sununary of 
this poem ^'and Protesilaus died at the hands 
of Hector" is not an independent tradition, but 
is founded on the Iliad and in plain violation of 
Homer, as will appear later. In the Aethiopis 
Achilles is slain by Paris with the aid of Apollo. 
No other Trojan is named in the Chrestomathia 
of Proclus as sharing in the events of this poem. 
In the Ilias Parva Paris is slain by Philoctetes, 
who has just come from Lemnos. Even here 
Paris is not slain as a coward or in flight, but is 
bold enough to face Philoctetes in a duel. No 
other Trojan has a part in that poem, except 
Helenus, who like a traitor informs the Greeks 
how his own city may be taken. Thus we find 
that in the first three poems of the Cycle, leaving 
the Iliad out of account, Paris is the only Trojan 
whose acts are of sufficient importance to receive 
mention in the summary by Proclus. Paris alone 
of the Trojans had the honor of causing the death 
of a Greek leader, and that leader was none other 
than Achilles himself. 

The character of Paris in the Iliad involves 
constant contradictions. The first great contra- 
diction is that he who had proved himself to be 



228 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

such a oraven and a coward should be introduced 
as ^'Alexander the godlike.'' Why this honoring 
namet The scholiast to M 93 says that Paris was 
called Alexander since he defended his father- 
land when the foe came against it. Evidently 
the honoring titles, ** divine/* "godlike,** "royal 
Alexander,'* which at first glance seem so in- 
appropriate in Homer, are in complete harmony 
with pre-Homeric traditions. The second contra- 
diction is found in the fact that a Greek, with his 
feeling that to be beautiful is also to be brave, 
/cm>M ««* a7«tfcfe, should have represented a coward 
as handsome. Paris is the "fairest in form'* and 
because of his beauty the Greeks at once drew 
the conclusion that he was the Trojan champion. 
It was the physical defects in Thersites on which 
the poet placed the greatest emphasis, and Homer 
had a real difficulty in representing the handsome 
figure of Paris in the guise of a poltroon, capable 
of the ignoble part he played in the third book. 
A third contradiction is found in the continued 
influence of Paris. After fleeing from Menelaus 
and disgracing himself and his cause, he should 
have had but little influence or power. Yet on 
the evening of that very day, when Antenor made 
the inevitable suggestion that the oaths be kept 
and Helen with her possessions be returned to the 
Greeks, Paris arose and insultingly refused to 
consider the idea of returning Helen. Hector was 
mute, no one answered, and the herald was sent 
to report to the Greeks the decision of Paris. The 



HECTOR 229 

power of Paris was so oat of keeping with his 
character that Herodotus (n, 120) could only ex- 
plain this contradiction by assuming a tradition 
according to which Helen had never been in Troy, 
but was detained in Egypt; otherwise Hector, in 
spite of Paris, would have delivered her to the 
Greeks. It is also to be noted that, though the 
other married sons of Priam lived in the same 
palace with their father (Z 242), Paris had a 
palace all his own. 

Paris is no coward in Homer and no weakling. 
His heroic proportions show through, despite the 
efforts of the poet to paint him as a mean and 
timorous warrior. This is shown by the fact that 
he and not Hector determined the decision of the 
assembly, and by the following chance details: 
Paris was a leader of one of the larger divisions 
of the Trojans (M 93). When Aeneas was sore 
pressed by the Greeks he sought help, ** trying to 
fix his eye on Paris'* (N 490). In the very thick 
of the contest Hector was much encouraged by 
finding Paris ** arousing his companions and urg- 
ing them to fighf (N 766.) Moreover, it was 
the skill and bravery of Paris (A 504) that saved 
to the Trojans the fighting of the third day's 
struggle. 

Only one Greek of any importance was slain 
in the action of the Iliad, and comparatively few 
were wounded. Paris was the only Trojan to 
wound a Greek of the first rank who was not him- 
self slain. Euphorbus and Hector, who caused 



230 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

the death of PatrocluSy Pandams, who wounded 
MenelanSy Cooiiy who pierced Agamemnon, and 
Socus, who stabbed Odysseus, paid for their brief 
glory with their lives. But Paris, without divine 
aid, wounded Diomede, Machaon, and Eurypylus, 
slew Euchenor, Menesthius, and Dei'ochus ; yet he 
himself escaped. His greatness in Homer is of 
a like character with that in the Cypria, Aethiopis, 
and Ilias Parva. 

Paris was an archer, but that was no disgrace 
despite the anger of Diomede at being shot with 
an arrow. A people who regarded the ambush as 
the place of greatest honor (A 227) and a tradition 
which gave glory to such archers as Teucer and 
Philoctetes, or made the bow of Heracles his 
greatest possession, and the bow of Odysseus 
the arbiter of marriage — ^these could not have 
considered skill in archery a source of infamy. 
Paris ' sole weakness was moral weakness. Great 
as he was in tradition and is in Homer, the false 
friend and adulterer could not be permitted a 
position of epic leadership. No people under the 
control of such a leader as Paris could win sjm- 
pathy. Tradition furnished the Trojans with no 
other leader, therefore the poet must create one. 

Hector has no place in the pre-Homeric tradi- 
tion as given in the Cypria. In that poem his name 
is found but once, where it is said that he slew 
Protesilaus. Homer knew nothing of this, as his 
account of the death of that warrior (B 698 ff.) 
shows. In this passage in the Catalogue it is said 



HECTOR 231 

that a Dardanian man slew Protesilaus. This 
caimot refer to Hector, since Homer never nses 
the word Dardanian for Trojan/ The author of 
the Cypriay with the plot of the Iliad before him, 
could not see why so important a hero as Hector 
had no standing in tradition outside of Homer, 
and so created an exploit for him by quietly 
removing the Homeric ** Dardanian man'* and 
substituting Hector. Here the attempt to give 
Hector a position in the Cycle which was not 
warranted by pre-Homeric tradition is evident 
and unmistakable. 

It is a matter of common observation that 
many of the leaders in the events described by 
the Hiad have designations which have no ade- 
quate explanation in the action of the poem itself. 
Priam, who does not and could not wield a spear, 
is none the less ** Priam of good ashen spear,*' 
and, though withdrawn from planning, is still 
** valiant in coimcil.*' Achilles, whether he be 
standing or seated, is ' * swift-footed ' ' or * * fleet of 
foot,*' yet on the one occasion when he has the 
opportunity to show his fleetness of foot he was 
unable to overtake Hector. He must needs receive 
the help of Athena, who orders him to refresh 
himself while she induces Hector to come near. 
The simple fact that an epithet is applied to 
Achilles which has no interpretation in the events 
of the Iliad shows that he is a traditional hero 
and not a new creation of the poet. The epithet 

▼See Leaf, Troy, 159. 



/•• 



232 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

must have its explanation elsewhere. Odysseus 
early in the Iliad is called (B 278) "the city- 
sacking Odysseus, ' ' the reason for which is found 
not in the Iliad, but in outside tradition. Many 
other examples might be given, but these suf- 
ficiently illustrate the principle that in the Iliad 
certain epithets carry the implicit proof of tra- 
ditions other than those told by the poet. If 
Hector be an old and traditional hero he should 
bring into the poem with him some traces of his 
earlier existence. In the Iliad there are twenty- 
seven various epithets applied to Hector — ^an un- 
rivaled richness and variety of epithet — ^yet not 
one of these refers to any relationship, trait, or 
quality not shown in the poem itself. The Iliad 
furnishes a full explanation for every attribute 
given to Hector by Homer. If the number of 
epithets were small, this might be due to accident. 
Here, however, chance can have no part, and we 
may confidently assume that the tradition whidi 
among so many epithets has left no traces of its 
influence had no influence to leave, and that the 
character of Hector was beyond its power to shape 
or change. 

As already stated, the Trojan leader, Paris, 
whom tradition furnished, was for moral reasons 
unworthy to be the great leader of either side. 
The poet was therefore obliged to substitute 
another whose human and moral excellencies 
fitted him for leadership. The degradation of 
Paris involved one great contradiction, namely, 



HECTOR 233 

the impression that the warrior who did so much 
was a coward. The creation of Hector involved 
the second great contradiction^ namely, the im- 
pression that the warrior who did so little was a 
mighty champion. Tradition narrowed the poet 's 
range in either case. He might create a hero, but 
he did not create a war. The prowess of the 
Trojans is described only in vague expressions, 
since no Greek of independent importance is slain 
during the course of the Hiad. Patroclus is promi- 
nent merely because of his intimacy with Achilles, 
and besides him only two of any consequence fall, 
Medon, the bastard son of Ajax, the son of Oileus, 
and the colorless Tlepolemus. On the Trojan 
side the slaughter is almost complete; Adrastus 
(the Greek names deserve notice), Asteropaeus, 
Dolon, Euphorbus, Hippothous, Cebriones, Ly- 
caon, Socus, Coon, Pandarus, Sarpedon, and 
Hector, all perish. Paris is the only Trojan to 
wound a leader and then escape with his life. 
Evidently the strength of tradition tied Homer's 
hands and gave Paris a charmed life in the Hiad.^ 
Hector receives high praise in general terms, 
but the events of the Iliad give no warrant for 
assigning him a high place as a soldier. He is 
found retreating at his first appearance in battle, 
is no match for Ajax in the duel, is almost slain by 
Diomede with a spear, and by Ajax with a rock, 
fainting each time; and he flies before Odysseus, 
Agamemnon, Patroclus, Diomede, Ajax, and 
Achilles. It is only as a man, a son, and a father 



234 THE UNITY OF HOMER 

that Hector really wins respect; that is, just in 
those qualities where he may appear noble with- 
out fighting the Greeks. 

Why is Hector so great as a man, so secondary 
as a soldier T If one will read the list of the 
Trojans he will find, as already noted, that with 
few exceptions they have Greek names ; hence are 
probably Greek adaptations or creations. The 
Greeks had their own traditions of their own 
leaders conducting a war against Troy to recover 
Helen, who had been taken from Menelaus by 
Paris. Paris bears a foreign name, his part in 
tradition is sure ; but tradition, so far as the Tro- 
jans were concerned, went little further. It did 
not tell who built the ship, and so the poet had it 
built by a Greek with a long line of Greek ances- 
tors. The name Hector also has a good Greek 
derivation and is surely Greek. It is doubtful if 
the quarrel between Achilles and Agamemnon had 
a larger place in the early Greek traditions of Troy 
than the quarrel between Achilles and Odysseus, 
which is given but ten verses in the eighth book of 
the Odyssey (6 73 ff.). At the opening of the Iliad 
the Greeks are before Troy, and the Trojans 
within the walls. The Greeks lose no leader, 
warrior, or king of real importance. At the close 
of the poem both sides are in the same relative 
positions in which they were at the beginning. 
On the Trojan side the slaughter has been almost 
annihilation. Those who fell, Adrastus, Pan- 
darus. Hector, and the rest, were for the most 



HECTOR 235 

part created to be participants in the events 
occasioned by the wrath of Achilles. They never 
had an existence elsewhere^ and by their death 
the poet accounted for their absence from sub- 
sequent events of the epic tradition. This ex- 
plains the contradictions in the character of 
Hector. The Greek leaders were already known 
and their fates determined. Tradition had de- 
cided that Ajax was to fall by his own hand, 
Achilles to be slain by Paris, Agamemnon by his 
wife and her paramour; the fate of each was 
already settled. What was there left for Hector t 
No new Greek general of outstanding importance 
could be added, and no local hero could be re- 
placed, any more than a modem novel dealing 
with a modem war could add a new and important 
general to the list of famous heroes. Homer then 
was forced to make a Trojan champion without 
the privilege of allowing him to slay any one of 
the really great Greeks. Hector's greatness, 
therefore, is to be human and not military. Even 
so he must have some military glory, hence the 
poet created the character of Patroclus. 

Patroclus does not appear in the Catalogue of 
the Ships, is not named in the Cypria, except 
under the influence of the Iliad, where it is said 
*' Patroclus taking Lycaon to Lemnos sold him.*' 
Here the author of the Cypria, unable to explain 
the absence of Patroclus from tradition, reshapes 
the story of Lycaon as found in Homer, to give 
Patrodus a place in his poem. In the Hiad it 



236 THE UNITY OF HOMER 

was Achilles and not Patroclus who sold Lycaon 
(<D 78). Evidently the author of the Cypria 
changed the Hiad to secure a little glory for 
Patroclus, in the same manner he gave to Hector 
the honor of slaying Protesilaus. There were no 
families claiming descent from Patroclus, and the 
poet explains his lack of heroic following by the 
simple device of having him slay one of his youth- 
ful companions, and then go into exile. 

There was no place for Phoenix in a poem 
which exalted Patroclus, since each owed his 
prominence to the friendship of Achilles. The 
creation of Hector involved the degradation of 
Paris; the creation of Patroclus the practical 
elimination of Phoenix. Homer, like an Athenian 
father, could cause the death of no children but 
his own; Patroclus he could expose, but tradi- 
tion's child, Phoenix, he must not kill. So he 
might slay Hector, and also, just because he was 
the poet 's own, he may have made him his mouth- 
piece to express his own advanced ideas on re- 
ligion, patriotism, and domestic relations. In 
religion Hector is frankly rationalistic. He must 
have shocked Homer's hearers, as he did the 
scholiast, by his bold refusal to consider plain 
omens (M 237), and must have voiced the poet's 
patriotism when he told the Trojans the glory 
which hallowed one who died in defense of his 
fatherland. His ideals of domestic relations are 
shown in the tenderness with which Hector treats 
Andromache. It is certainly worthy of note that 



HECTOR 237 

this devoted husband should have been reared in 
a polygamous household and should himself have 
championed a war founded on treachery and 
adultery. In Hector the poet seems to have laid 
aside his mask and to show his own features. 

The bitterness which Athena and Hera felt "^ 
toward Hector followed him even after his death. 
They were both indignant at the mere suggestion 
that his corpse be spared the ignominy of being 
thrown to the dogs. This malignity cannot be 
explained by anything which has happened in 
the poem. The reason is that Hector was the 
champion in a war due to the scorning of their 
charms. He was hated hot for his own sake but^ 
for his cause. Hector plays the part in the Iliad 
that Paris took in tradition, and just this fact, 
that he is substituting for Paris, explains their 
rage against him. The anger they felt for Paris 
must be spent on the one who assumed his place. 
This does not mean that the part taken by Hector 
in the scenes of the Hiad was ever taken by Paris, 
for none of these scenes existed before Homer. 
But in tradition it was Paris who was the leader 
of the Trojans, and it was against him that Hera 
and Athena were both enraged. With that tra- 
dition as a background, Homer created a new 
poem. The anger of Achilles was essentially the 
poet's own, the anger of these two goddesses 
against the Trojan leader he found as a definite 
part of the existing tradition. When, therefore. 
Homer created a new leader, that anger was an 
entailment on that leadership. 



238 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

I Milton stood in much the same relation to his 
sources as Homer stood to his. Milton must have 
an Adam, an Eve, a Garden of Eden, a Satan, a 
Tree of Forbidden Fruit; the tempter must 
appear in the form of a serpent and the woman 
must be the first to f alL All these the poet found 
in the Bible story and they must be retained. But 
the poetry, the descriptions, and most of the inci- 
dents were his own. Homer likewise had a list 
of Greek heroes, and a brief reference to the 
wrath of Achilles ; he was familiar with the story 
of the rape of Helen by Paris, a prince of Troy. 
Tradition supplied him with scant information 
in regard to the Trojans, hence the long list of 

L- Trojans with Greek names. Although tradition 
told of the death of such first-class Greek heroes 
as Protesilaus, Palamedes, Achilles, and Ajax at 
Troy, it told of the death of none during the 
wrath of Achilles. Accordingly the poet had to 
content himself with the death of so subordinate 
a leader as Patroclus. 

The niad is not the production of a poet who 
reshaped and refitted the work of others into a 
more perfect whole, who found his characters 
already made and retouched them now at this 
place, now at that, who added a little here 
and removed a little there. It is the work of 
a poet who largely created his own characters 
and gave them their names. Homer was the 
first poet to draw the portrait of Hector and to 
give him a name, a Greek common noun, and 



HECTOR 239 

make it a proper notm, the name of a hero. How 
transparent most of the names given to Hector 
and his f amily, Astyanax, Deiphobus, Polydorus, 
PoliteSy AntiphonuSy and AgathonI But the 
names of those heroes who undoubtedly belonged 
to tradition, names such as Peleus, Tydeus, Ajax, 
IcariuSy and Bellerophon, do not so easily show 
their origin. Why are these names so dark while 
the names of Hector and his family are so trans- 
parent T The reason is this: the names of Hector 
and his brothers, except Paris, do not belong to 
tradition and are not traditional names. They 
are names put together by Homer himself. There 
may, indeed, be tradition in Homer, but it is only 
an incident; his real aim is poetry. 



CHAPTER Vin 

THE ILIAD AND THE ODYSSEY 

We know nothing of Homer's sources or of 
the patterns which he followed — if he had any 
patterns to follow. Not a line, not a reliable 
reference to any piece, of earlier literature has 
been preserved. There seems to be a possible 
allusion to the Argonautic expedition, but all the 
poems dealing with that adventure are much later 
than Homer, and may be based on inferences 
drawn from Homer rather than from earlier 
poetry. The tales of Meleager, of Nestor's young 
manhood, of the Amazons, and all the others may 
be susceptible of a similar interpretation. 
r^ There is thus only the scantiest material, and 
that doubtful, from which to reconstruct pre- 
Homeric poetry. And yet there must have been 
poets before Homer. The Hiad and the Odyssey 
show no experiments, no hesitancy in forcing a 
recalcitrant language into a difficult poetic meter. 
The grace and ease with which the words of 
Homer fall into dactylic rhythm could have come 
only after ages of poetic development. The 
meter makes use of a long and difficult verse, a 
verse which is far removed from the movement 
of primitive songs. Language so rich and so 



THE ILIAD AND THE ODYSSEY 241 

complicated as Homer's contains within itself the 
evidence of the heritage of many generations of 
poets. It is doubtful if Milton's majestic verse was 
more xemoved from the ordinary daily speech in 
the time of Cromwell than the language of Homer 
was from that of the common man in that early 
day. The simple fact that there are five differ- 
ent forms for the infinitive **to be" ( elwt, Ififiepai^ 
i/jLevai^ efi/iev^ e/jLev) and four forms for the simple 
preposition *'in" (^i', tW, €*V, ctW), all metrically 
different, shows that the poet was not using the 
language of the common people, but a language 
of poetry in which these various forms had been 
preserved. Z' 

A comparison of this language with any prose 
rendering, however early and in whatever dialect, 
will show its superlative poetic character. This 
poetic cast can not be the work of a single man nor 
the result of the wide use of poetic license. For 
no people would permit the misuse or the mispro- 
nunciation of their own language, yet they would 
hear with delight old or poetic forms. Our own 
use of rare and old words in poetry and in 
devotion shows something akin to the poetic sur- 
vivals in Homer. 

All that we may in confidence say of the poets 
who lived before Homer is that they provided him 
with a language suited to the meter and to the 
theme of his great poems. The interval between 
the niad and the Odyssey cannot have been great, 
if we may judge from their language and from 



242 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

the civilization which both picture, and also from 
the production of other great pieces of literature 
in other ages and in other lands. Society is not 
long content with any one style of excellence. The 
enthusiasm which calls forth and rewards any one 
species of genius is soon spent. 

Had Homer lived at the end of the sixth 
century, he would probably have been a lyric 
poet; a generation later he would have been a 
dramatist; and in the next generation he might 
have been a writer of comedy, a philosopher, or 
an orator. Aeschylus, who ^'was the first to raise 
tragedy to the rank of real literature, * " was under 
thirty years of age when Sophocles was bom, and 
with the death of Sophocles Greek tragedy had 
run its creative course. State and religious sup- 
port of the drama exerted a most conservative 
influence, but despite this support the production 
of Greek tragedies as real literature practically 
coincided with the life of a single man, Sophocles. 
In like manner old comedy, middle comedy, and 
new comedy, each ran a brilliant and a brief 
career; and the genealogies of Pherecydes, re- 
puted to be the first man in Athens to apply prose 
to the uses of literature, were separated by hardly 
a generation from the history of Thucydides — 
greatest of all histories. 

It was not that men capable of writing lyric 
poetry ceased to be bom after the Persian Wars ; 
it was not that poets capable of dramatic efforts 

1 Fliekiiigery The Greek Theater and lU Drama, 2. 



THE ILIAD AND THE ODYSSEY 243 

did not appear after the age of Pericles; it was 
because the tastes and the impulses of men were 
different. No one could imagine that Milton, 
were he now living, would turn his hand to a 
Paradise Lost, or Cervantes his to a Don Quixote, 
or that Dante would take up anew the problems 
of the Inferno. We have no knowledge of any 
people who could in two different centuries in- 
spire kindred masterpieces of original genius. 
The period which could inspire short songs might 
last, but the influences which called into being 
long epic poems must certainly have been very 
brief. 

The tradition that Homer and Hesiod once 
contested for the prize of poetic excellence, and 
that Hesiod won, is probably only another way of 
saying that the Greeks soon tired of the creative 
works of the imagination and preferred for a 
season the more practical descriptions of daily 
life, and the calm and unimaginative tales of 
theology. The utter collapse of the creative epic 
spirit as shown in the poetry of the Epic Cycle, 
if we base our opinion of the merits of these poems 
on the estimate of competent ancient authorities, 
shows that Homer had no successors. The Hiad 
and the Odyssey represent the golden age of epic 
poetry, and golden ages are always brief. 

The Greeks at all times took great pride 
in authorship. Hesiod, the earliest poet after 
Homer, informs us that ^ ' The Muses at one time 
taught Hesiod the gift of beautiful song," thus 



V 



244 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

enriching the world with his own name; Alcman 
tells us that '^Alcman composed these verses and 
this song**; Theognis at the very beginning of 
his poem says, "These verses are by Theognis 
of Megara/' Hecataeus, Herodotus, as well as 
Thuoydides, each begins his history with his own 
name and an account of his own authorship. 
Pheidias is said to have put his own likeness on 
the shield which he made for the statue of Athena ; 
and similarly statues, votive tablets, and painted 
vases were in classical times frequently marked 
with the name of the artist and even with the 
name of his father also and his home. This desire 
for glory made it unnecessary to offer valuable 
prizes at the great games — ^the ambition for per- 
sonal renown was incentive enough. It was this 
passion for personal glory that made each of the 
Greek heroes at Salamis write his own name as 
the one who had done the most to achieve that 
victory. The Greeks in all these respects were 
totally xmlike their eastern neighbors, so that no 
deductions in regard to oriental origins, except by 
contrast, are of any value. The eminent Orien- 
talist, Professor Jastrow, says:* 

Authorship counted for little in the ancient Orient. 
Oreek culture with its emphasis on individualism may 
be said to have invented the idea of authorship, so 
far as it involves the individual's claim to his mental 
product. We have no specific word for author in ancient 
Hebrew, but merely a term ordinarily rendered as 
''scribe," which may be used iudiflferently for a secre- 

s Jastrow, M., Hebrew and Bahylonian Traditions, 285. 



THE ILIAD AND THE ODYSSEY 245 

tary who writes the dictation, for one who copies or 
compiles what another has composed, as well as for one 
who indites an original composition. 

Another result of this method of literary production 
in the ancient Orient was that.no book was produced 
at a single sitting, as it were. A book was always a 
compilation: it grew from age to age, much as a story 
grows with each repetition. 

The Greeks lived in another world from this 
world of the Orient in whidb. the *' scribe^* was 
simply the man who writes; in Greek the word 
poet means the creator, the man who produces 
something v^orth while. The very name shows 
the great honor in which the poet was held. 
Though the books of the Orient grew and changed 
from age to age, we know of no literary, no non- 
scientific, work of the Greeks which was not either 
finished by the author himself, or left perma- 
nently incomplete. Works of erudition or of 
philosophy may well have been preserved by 
pupils in the spirit in which these were received 
from the lips of the master, but this was not true 
of great literature. Thucydides died leaving his 
history incomplete and Xenophon undertook to 
tell the story of the Peloponnesian War for the 
period Thucydides left unfinished. But it was his 
own Hellenica; he did not try to add to or change 
what Thucydides had written. 

The permanency of Greek traits makes it most 
unlikely that a poet who wrote the parting scene 
between Hector and Andromache, the speeches 
of the embassy, the ransoming of the body of 



246 THE UNITY OF HOMBB 

Hector, the journey of Telemachus, or the wan- 
dering^ of Odysseus would have been willing to 
give up his own reputation for the glory of an- 
other, or that he would have reshaped the poetry 
already written by another so that he might suc- 
cessfully escape from the fame of his own great 
creations. Sir Philip Sidney's famous renuncia- 
tion of the water he so feverishly craved was 
downright selfishness compared with the man who 
gave these great scenes of poetry to Homer and 
slipped stealthily away with such secrecy that his 
gift was unnoticed for nearly three thousand 
years. Sir Philip knew that at least two persons 
were conscious of his renunciation, the man who 
drank the water and the man who carried it, but 
the poet who gave all this glory to HojDier had no 
such satisfaction — ^all he craved was to escape 
detection. And the man who did this was a self- 
conscious Greek! 

The Iliad and the Odyssey were never anony- 
mous, they were never quoted as the work of some 
unknown poet, and they were never assigned to 

s^any other poet than to Homer. The theory that 
the Iliad and the Odyssey are the anonymous 
creation of a long era, traditional poems produced 
by many bards in many ages, makes an apprecia- 
tion of Greek civilization and Greek literature 
impossible, and confuses the Hebrew copying 
scribe with the exalted, creative Greek poet. Just 
this confusion, however, called into being Mur- 

', ray's Rise of the Greek Epic. 






THE ILIAD AND THE ODYSSEY 247 

No poet ever put a higher estimate on his own 
poetry than Homer puts on the Iliad and the 
Odyssey. He says of Penelope that the glory of 
her excellence will never perish, that the gods wUl 
preserve her fame in pleasing song. Odysseus 
tells the Phaeacians that he is in the thoughts of 
all men and his glory has reached the skies. 
Helen consoles herself with the conviction that, 
after all, perhaps the Trojan war and all its woes 
were designed by Zeus that she and they who have 
suffered most may serve for a song among the 
generations yet unborn, and Alcinous, when he 
notices the emotions which Odysseus can not con- 
ceal whenever he hears the story of the woes ~| 
endured by the Trojans and the Argives, tries to 
comfort him by saying: ** Perhaps the gods have 
brought on these very woes and decreed destruc- 
tion to men, that generations yet to be shall have 
the boon of song." Milton's muse 

That with no middle flight intends to soar 
Above the Aonian mount 

seems fairly self-conscious. But even Milton did 
not intimate that man lost the joys of Eden in 
order to gain the boon of immortality in the 
poetry of Paradise Lost. 

It is not alone these actors whom I have named 
that look forward to the glory of song, but 
Agamemnon holds up before his men the disgrace 
which will be theirs in coming years, if they fail 
in the purpose of the war; Calchas tells of por- 
tents the renown of which shall never die, and 



J 



248 THE UNITY OF HOMER 

Hector, when he realizes that Athena has lured 
him to his doom, does not collapse but takes new 
courage in the determination to do some worthy 
deed, a deed to be known to future generations 
of men. A poet who could paint the sufferers 
f rojm the war as repaid for it all by the immor- 
tality his song would bring to them could hardly 
have spumed a like iimnortality for himself. 

This all-pervading, self-conscious, Greek indi- 
vidualism is no more evident in Pindar, who likens 
himself to the eagle, the divine bird of Zeus; or 
in Aeschylus, who unabashed by defeat in a 
dramatic contest proudly said, * * I leave my merits 
to the decision of time, ' ' than it is in the epitaph 
of the sculptor: **I was an artist in stone, in no 
way inferior to Praxiteles," or in that of the 
woodchopper: **Here I lie a woodchopper; a 
better woodchopper I never saw." No man was 
ever more thoroughly a Greek than the creator 
of the niad and the Odyssey; he too must have 
had this Greek passion for individual glory. 

The arguments against an historical Homer 
might seem justified by the fact that his name is 
not found in the writings of any Greek author 
until the middle of the sixth century, or presum- 
ably three hundred years after the time of the 
poet. (The conjectural reference to Homer by 
Callinus is based on an emendation and is most 
improbable.) This interval of three centuries 
seems a serious gap in the Homeric tradition. It 
must be remembered, however, that we have but 



THE ILIAD AND THE ODYSSEY 249 

little literature dating from the period between 
Homer and Xenophanes, who was the first to nse 
the name of Homer. Also, this literature is highly 
fragmentary, largely preserved by grammarians 
and rhetoricians, who wished to illustrate some 
rule of language, or by compilers of books of 
choice quotations. 

The first writers whose works are preserved 
in any large compass make frequent use of the 
name of the poet. Pindar and Simonides both 
quote him and use the name Homer, and in the 
first prose works which we have Homer's name 
frequently occurs. No one of these early writers 
refers to him as some unknown or shadowy per- 
sonality, but as the writer whom everyone knew, 
and to whom Greece was most indebted for its 
theology and its civilization. 

The first elegiac poet whose name we know is 
Callinus, who probably lived early in the seventh 
century. The first poet of the erotic elegy whose 
name we know is Mimnermus, who also Uved in 
the seventh century. Oddly enough, however, the 
name of neither of these is found in any Greek 
writer before Strabo, whose life extended into the 
first century of the Christian era. That is, neither 
Callinus nor Mimnermus is named in any Greek 
literature for about seven hundred years after his 
own age, a period probably twice as long as from 
Homer to the first mention of his name. Yet those 
critics who have been most skeptical in regard 
to Homer do not throw the existence of Callinus 



250 THE UNITY OP HOMBE 

and Mimnermus into the realm of the impossible 
or the improbable. How absolutely fallacious 
arguments from silence are likely to be is shown 
by the fact that the name of Chaucer is found 
neither in the poetry of Milton nor in that of 
Shakespeare, although the bulk of their poetry 
is far greater than all the poetry surviving from 
Homer to Pindar. 

Although it is hard to decide how much in his 
plots or in his narratives Homer owed to the 
poets before him, there are certain traits or 
features which must have been his own. These 
are found in both poems, but not elsewhere, so 
far as we can judge, except in writings directly 
influenced by Homer. 

The poet in selecting a war-theme for his Hiad 
did not take up the whole war, but a small frag- 
ment of that war just before its dose, hence all 
the story of the Hiad covers hardly more than 
seven weeks, and the fighting is confined to but 
four days.* Twenty-one days are given to the 
opening book of the poem, and a like number to 
the closing book, nearly all of which pass by event- 
less. For instance, in the first book it is said that 
? the plague lasted for nine days; and in the last 
book it is said that nine days were spent in pre- 
paring the pyre for Hector. 

In the Odyssey Homer took a tale of wander- 
ings and adventures which might have spread 

. sAn excellent disenseion is given hy Professor Bassett in liis 

V article, "The Structural Similaritj of the Hiad and Odyssey, as 
Bevealed in the Treatment of the Hero's Fate," CUtss, Jour., 
XIV, 557. 



THE ILIAD AND THE ODYSSEY 251 

over many years, but he confined his subject to 
the story of the last few days, so that the entire 
action of the Odyssey embraces about forty days, - 
seventeen of which go by in a single verse which 
says that he sailed on for seventeen days, and in 
another verse it is said that he made his raft in 
four days, thus eliminating four days more, hence 
the days about which something is really told 
number less than twenty, or not far from the 
number of eventful days in the Iliad. 

This superb piece of poetic economy of confin- >/ ,. 
ing the action to a few important days seems to 
have been found in none of the poems of the Epic ^ 
Cycle, if we may trust the authority of Aristotle, 
who contrasts the Iliad and the Odyssey in this 
regard with all the other epics. It is not found in 
any of the later Greek epic poets, such as Hesiod, 
ApoUonius of Bhodes, and Quintus of Smyrna, 
nor in Vergil, whose poem covers the events of 
years. Vergil clearly followed the annalistic 
style of the poets of the Cycle rather than the 
method of the Hiad and the Odyssey. And it is 
not found in the Paradise Lost of Milton. ^ 

The first word of the Iliad is ** wrath,'* ft^wp, * •; ^ 
the first word of the Odyssey is **man,'' apSpa^ 
each poem thus giving the theme with the very 
first word. The story of the Hiad does not depend • 
on the character of Achilles, but on his anger, an 
anger which eliminates even the hero from long 
stretches of the poem. But in the Odyssey the 
hero himself is always the center of the poem, 
quite as important when absent as when present. 



,^ 



252 THE UNITY OF HOMBB 

Apparently Homer was the only poet of the 
early epic thus clearly to define his theme at the 
very start. The first verse of the Thehais is 
quoted as: ^^Sing of Argos, goddess, of thirsty 
Argos, whence the chieftains came." The Thebais 
seems to have been only remotely concerned with 
Argos itself; the real story was connected with 
the struggle at Thebes. The Little Iliad is said 
to have begun with the verse: ^'I sing of Hium 
and Dardania of fine steeds. " If we had no other 
means than this verse of judging the contents of 
that poem, we could hardly arrive at any idea of 
the varied themes given in the summary of 
Proclus. Each of the longer poems of Hesiod 
begins with praise of the Muses and gives no hint 
of the subject of the proposed poems. ApoUonius 
of Bhodes introduces his Argonautica with the 
verse: ** Beginning with thee, O Phoebus, I will 
call to mind the deeds of ancient men." This 
gives not the slightest inkling of the heroes or 
their exploits. Quintus of Smyrna begins with 
the verse **When god-like Hector was slain by the 
son of Peleus," leaving us quite in the dark in 
regard to his intended theme. All these introduc- 
tions, or most of them, seem to be influenced by 
Homer, yet are totally unlike him. Horace, in his 
Ars Poetica 137, contrasts the simple dignified 
words in which Homer begins his poems with 
the bombastic introduction of the cyclic poem: 
Fortunam Priami cantaho et nohile helium. It 
must have been more than pure accident that the 



THE ILIAD AND THE ODYSSEY 253 

Iliad and the Odyssey both have this perfect intro- 
duction, a perfection approached by no other early 
poet. Vergil's Anna virumque cano, and Milton's 
Of man's first disobedience are simply imitations 
of Homer. 

In each poem Homer gives the impression that 
the plot is well known. Nevertheless, so full are 
the details, so clear the outlines, that he seems 
in each to be creating a new plot and telling a 
new story. We learn as if by accident the cause 
of the anger, its intensity, and its results, and yet 
we fully understand it without the help of any 
details not given in the Iliad itself. In a like man- 
ner we learn that Odysseus has been twenty years 
from home, that his wife is Penelope, that she is 
beset with suitors, and that their land and home 
have both drifted into something resembling an- 
archy. It is highly important in estimating the 
small debt Homer owed to tradition that we are 
able to appreciate both poems without any foot- 
notes, and without any knowledge of the tradition 
back of Homer, except as the poet himself gives 
us that knowledge. 

The most inattentive reader of Homer has 
noticed how dramatic the story is and how large 
a part is devoted to the speeches of the various 
participants. We judge of the character of the 
different actors in Homer, for the most part, not 
from what the poet tells us, but from the words_ 
of these men themselves. A little over one half 
of the Hiad and the Odyssey is in direct speech. 



254 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

The poetry of Homer is so dramatic^ that, with 
very little editing, large parts of it conld be pnt 
upon the stage almost in the very words of the 
original-^^^he Odyssey shows no decline in the 
matter of direct speech, indeed a trifle less than 
one half of the Iliad, a little more than one half 
of the Odyssey, are composed in the form of direct 
speech. 

No other ancient epic poet approached Homer 
in this regard, even when he had the example of 
Homer before him and tried to imitate him.* 
Hesiod has few or no speaking characters and 
they most unimportant ; and the scanty fragments 
from the Epic Cycle seem to warrant the assump- 
tion that these poems were narrative rather than 
dramatic. It must have been due to the genius 
of Homer that his characters reveal their natures 
by their own words and acts rather than by any 
description by the poet himself. This assumption 
applies to no single portion but to all parts of both 
poems. Even in the last book of the Odyssey, 
which the critics despise, these character-revealing 
speeches abound. 

Both poems describe things of superlative 
excellence, not in themselves, but in the effect they 
produce upon others. When Helen first appeared 
Homer made no attempt to audit her charms. We 
know how beautiful she must have been from the 
words spoken by the old men of Troy, men long 

«The fignres are given bj Elderkin, ''Aspect of the Speeeli 
in the Later Greek Epic," Johns Hopkins XJniyersity dissertation, 
1906. 



THE ILIAD AND THE ODYSSEY 255 

beyond the years of youthful enthusiasm, when 
they said: ^^The Greeks and the Trojans cannot 
be blamed for undergoing sorrows these many 
years for a woman so beautiful/' We have an 
added feeling for the majesty of Agamenmon 
when we hear Priam say, as he looks down from 
the walls of Troy: **I never saw so stately or so 
handsome a man, for he surely looks like a king. * ' 
The words are all the more convincing, since 
Priam is ignorant of the fact that he was asking 
about Agamemnon. 

In the last book of the Iliad, when Priam came 
inelo the tent or hut of Achilles to beg the body of 
his son, the poet brought Priam, the father of the 
man who had slain Achilles' nearest friend, into 
the presence of the very warrior who had robbed 
him of Hector as well as of other sons, and thus 
described their feelings as they gazed, each into the 
face of his foe : * * Then Priam the son of Dardanus 
looked with surprise at Achilles, because of his 
stature and his beauty, for his face was as the 
face of the gods ; while Achilles in his turn stood 
astonished when he saw the majestic presence 
and heard the noble language of Priam. ' ' Where 
have dignity and nobility ever been better pictured 
than in these verses ! The fact that Priam should 
see nobility and beauty in his greatest foe is 
praise indeed, and that Achilles should gaze 
wrapped in admiration at the majestic presence 
of the very man whose son he had determined to 
throw to the dogs gives an impression of exalted 
beauty beyond all description. 




256 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

When Telemachus and Peisistratus, the son of 
Nestor, came to visit Menelaus in his own mag- 
nificent palace, the palace is not described, but 
we catch some glimpses of its beauty from these 
words: **And they gazed with wonder through- 
out the palace of the Zeus-nourished Menelaus, 
for it was as the splendor of the sun or moon 
throughout the high-roofed halls." 

The island of Calypso must have been of 
wondrous beauty, for Hermes, when he came 
straight from splendid Olympus to warn that 
goddess that she could no longer detain Odyssei 
even Hermes ** stood and looked with raptui 
the beauties of the island. * ' It was only af te: 
had feasted his eyes on this earthly paradise that 
he continued on his mission. What must have 
been the charm ol|fe island that could thus hold 
a god familiar witl^he beauties of Olympus ! It 
adds impressiveness to the devotion Odysseus had 
for his own native land when we know that he 
preferred all the struggles and dangers which lay 
between him and Ithaca rather than quietly to live 
in that entrancing island. 

We get some indication of the extreme ugliness 
of the monstrous wife of the cannibal Antiphates 
from the simple verse : * * The men when they saw 
her looked on her with loathing. ' ' 

Such a superlative piece of poetic economy, 
describing unusual objects by their effect, is, 
naturally, rarely used ; and Homer has numerous 
detailed descriptions — such as the descriptions of 



THE ILIAD AND THE ODYSSEY 



257 



the shield of ALgamemnon, the chariot and horses 
of Poseidon, the ngliness of Thersites, the palace 
and gardens of Alcinous, the cave of the Cyclops, 
or the hideousness of Scylla. 

Homer loved to withhold the crjaJLJJ^d also 
to prolongjthejuspense in cases of gn^eat excite- 
ment. When Achilles comes back with his new 
armor we expect that he will msh upon the field 
and immediately meet and slay Hector, but Odys- 
seus interferes with the demand that the soldiers 
first be fed, a suggestion which leads to debate 
and delay. When at last all impediments seem 

tioved and Achilles rushes forward to avenge 
roclus, a multitude of actions postpone the 
climax. The hero must first meet Aeneas, and 
then Lycaon; he must be thwarted by the god of 
the river; and even then it is only after another 
series of delays that he comes face to face 
with Hector. Exactly similar is the plan of the 
Odyssey. When that hero returns to his palace 
and sees with his own eyes the violence of the 
suitors, we expect that he will at once assert his 
power and take vengeance. But there is first the 
fight with the beggar, the washing of the feet, 
the story of the scar, the description of the bow 
and how he came by it, then the attempts to string 
it, and the seemingly interminable series of de- 
lays ; and then at last the vengeance. 

Both poems agree so closely in the multiplicity 
of events and in the withholding of the climax, 
that almost the same number of events intervene 



1 



I 






258 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

between the time when Achilles hears of the death 
of Patroclus and determines to avenge the death 
of his friend, and the slaying of Hector, as inter- 
vene between the return of Odysseus to his own 
palace and the slaughter of the suitors. This 
gn^eat retardation in each poem covers about 
twenty-two hundred verses. This is no happy 
accident, no chance coincidence, and it is no 
imitation. It shows in the two poems the creative 
impulse of one and the same mind. 

Homer loves also in moments of great excite- 
ment to prolong the suspense. Achilles, when he 
sees that the Trojans are on the point of burning 
the fleet, smites his thighs in intense excitement 
and urges Patroclus to rush forth and save the 
ships, knowing that if they are consumed neither 
he nor the Greeks can escape. Just at this 
moment of haste and anxiety the poet stops to 
tell us how Patroclus arms himself. With aggra- 
vating minuteness he describes each piece of the 
armor and gives a list of all the o£Scers in the 
army, with their ancestry. He tells how Achilles 
goes to his tent and gets a cup his mother had 
given him, how he purifies it, and washes it in 
fresh water, then washes his own hands and offers 
a prayer of sixteen verses, after which he calmly 
returns to his tent and carefully puts the cup back 
in the chest. In exactly one hundred and fifty 
verses after Achilles smote his thighs does the 
poet permit Patroclus to move to the rescue. 



THE ILIAD AND THE ODYSSEY 259 

In the Odyssey when the hero, clinging under 
the belly of the ram, is carried from the cave of 
the Cyclops, the monster lays hold of the ram 
and makes him a long speech, while we and 
Odysseus are alike in suspense. Again, when / 
Odysseus cojnes to his palace in the guise of a v 
beggar, he makes his plans for vengeance revolve 
around his ability to keep himself unknown to the 
members of his household. But while his feet are 
being washed by the aged Eurycleia, who had 
nursed him in his infancy, she recognizes the old 
scar, and just when we are in intense anxiety to 
kimw whether she will baffle his plans, now that 
she knows the beggar is none other than the long 
absent Odysseus, the poet lets us wait while he 
tells of the birth and babyhood of the hero, how 
he came to be named Odysseus, how he happened 
to visit his grandfather, the details of the hunt 
on one of those visits, and all about the wild boar 
that made the scar, the scar which the nurse so 
easily recognized. 

But, though the poet may leave us anxious in 
regard to details, he always keeps us informed, 
well in advance, of the outcome of the plot and 
its chief features. No one needs to turn to the 
last page to see how matters are to end. When 
Agamemnon prays that the sun may not set until 
he has slain Hector and destroyed Troy, we are 
told that this prayer is not to be answered. We 
are warned that the plans to bring the war to 
an eqd by means of a duel between Paris and 



/ 



260 THE UNITY OF HOMER 

Menelaus are to be abortive. We are told in ad- 
it^ance that Patrodus' interest in the welfare of 
the Greeks is to lead to his own ruin; that the 
ships will not be destroyed by fire; that Hector 
will be slain ; and that his body will not be thrown 
to the dogs. No hearer of the Iliad is ever in 
donbt regarding the final outcome of every im- 
portant scene. In the Odyssey likewise we are 
assured that the hero will return in twenty years ; 
that he will have lost all his companions ; that he 
will escape from the Cyclops, the Sirens, Charyb- 
dis, Scylla, and the wrath of Poseidon; that he 
will slay the suitors, find his wife faithful, and 
will once more reestablish his rightful power in 
Ithaca. 

By thus forecasting events the poet relieved 
the anxiety of the hearers in regard to the final 
outcome. Neither poem, however, loses its power 
or sustained interest from the fact that the fate 
of the hero is never in doubt. Bather, as in the 
work of the Athenian dramatists, the merit of 
the poet lies in the manner of telling a story the 
mahi issues of which are already known to the 
audience. The simple fact that the poet of the 
Iliad and the Odyssey felt it necessary to point 
out in advance the course of the story, and that 
he did not assume that it was already known, is 
a strong indication that the plot was not the gift 
of tradition, but the independent creation of the 
poet himself. 



THE ILIAD AND THE ODYSSEY 261 . « . 

The climax of each poem comes not at the end, Jt ^ ^ 
but in the twenty-second book. The climax of tl^e 
Iliad is the death of Hector ; that of the Odyssey, 
the death of the suitors. The Iliad does not close 
until a pyre has been erected for Patroclus and 
funeral games held in his honor; not until the 
body of Hector has been ransomed and he, as weU 
as Patroclus, has been given the honor of funeral 
dirges and a dignified burial. The Iliad, which 
has seen so much bloodshed, so much excitement^ 
and so much passion, ends with the calm and 
simple verses: ^^And having heaped for hi 
a mound, they returned homeward, and beinj 
assembled within the palace of Priam they f easi 
with bounteous repast. Thus then they buried ' i 
Hector, the knight. '* In the Odyssey the palace /^nC^ ' i^fr^ 
is cleansed and purified after the slaughter df c ^\y^ 
the suitors, and the guilty servants punishe^. ^ 

Penelope recognizes that the beggar is indeed hor 
husband, Odysseus, who gives her a brief outlinle 
of his adventures. The shades of the suitors ar$ 
conducted to Hades, where many of the Greek 
leaders of the Trojan war are seen again; Odys-i 
sens then goes to the farm, where he meets and 
comforts his father; the factions of Ithaca are' 
reconciled; and this poem, with all its trials, sor- 
rows, and cruelties ends with these quiet verses : 
**Thu8 spake Athena, and Odysseus rejoiced in 
his heart, while Pallas Athena ratified friendly 
oaths between all factions, Pallas Athena, the 
daughter of Aegis-bearing Zeus, as she appeared 



f ft \' 






262 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

ike unto Mentor both in form and in voice. ' ' The 
Isimilarity of the closing of both of these poems 
[is startling, yet there is nothing of imitation. 
Both carry the marks of the same creative power 
working to the same end under different, although 
kindred conditions. 
^^^Jil^ The action of each poem is initiated by the 
^ r gods. Athena gives Achilles the cue for his 

anger, arouses Odysseus to stop the panic of the 
Greeks, provides the Iliad with a new start by 
encouraging Pandarus to break the oath, and is 
the means through which Hector succumbs to 
Achillea^ It is Athena also who puts the action 
y of the Odyssey in motion, and finds a setting for 

^ ] / the tale of the wanderings of Odysseus by her 

"'^^;^ advice to Nausicaa. She encourages and aids 

Odysseus in his slaughter of the suitors, just as 
she had cared for Achilles in the pursuit of 
Hector. The gods furnished the solution for the 
difficult problem of rescuing the body of Hector 
f roii a revengeful Achilles exactly as they solved 
the problem of bringing peace to Ithaca after the 
slaughter of so many of its nobility at the hands 
of the king. In each poem the gods are burlesqued 
and made the subject of coarse mirth, and in each 
they are used to give the air of probability to 
things which in themselves are most improbable. 
The opening of each poem is in a measure 
repeated or reproduced in the close. In th6 first 
book of the Iliad the plague lasts for nine days, 
the gods visit the Aethiopians for twelve days, 



''i^ 



THE ILIAD AND THE ODYSSEY 263 

and AchiUes nourishes his anger. On the twenty- 
first day the gods return, and Thetis goes to 
Olympus that she may supplicate Zeus to honor 
her son. These nimibers are repeated in the last 
book of the Iliad so closely that not only does this 
book cover twenty-one days, but the days are 
divided into nine and twelve precisely as they are 
in book one. Here, too, Achilles spends a like 
number of days in anger, here he is again visited 
by his mother, and she again goes to Olympus, 
to consult with Zeus. The Iliad opens in the pres- 
ence of the hosts of the Achaeans, and closes in. 
the presence of the hosts of the Trojans. There 
is thus a balance not only in time and in action, 
but in the setting as well. 

In the Odyssey, also, each scene in the intro-. 
duction corresponds with a like scene in the close., 
The poem is set in motion by the agency of Athena^ 
it is brought to an end by the same goddess. Iq ' ^ - ^ 
the beginning she hurries to Ithaca with the per-j ^ 
mission of Zeus in order to arouse Telemachus 
to action, and at the close by the command of tha1| 
same god she hastens back to Ithaca bringing 
peace to the island. Nearly every actor is named* 
or present in the first book, and nearly all re- 
appear to make their final bow at the close. The 
suitors are dead, but they are represented by their 
kinsmen. 

It was the sense of harmony or of balance 
which led the poet to open the Iliad with a period 
covering twenty-one days and to close it with the 



v 



264 



THE UNITY OP HOMER 




■•.■• i 



same number. A like feeling in the Odyssey made 
him give one day to the opening and one to the 
dosing of that poem. This balance can hardly be 
due to chance, but to the poetic instinct of a single 
mind. 

No one feature of Homeric poetry so impresses 
the casual reader as the large number of repeated 
verses. No other work of classical literature f ur- 

; nishes a parallel. But, in this regard, no part 
of the poetry of Homer differs from any other 
part. Each poem, both as a whole and in its parts, 
consists of repeated verses aggregating about one 
third of the entire number. Even those books 
which the critics characterize as centos, patch- 
work, made up of verses mechanically taken from 
other parts of the poems, are no more marked 
by repeated verses than are other books which 
are regarded as pure and original. The book 
most censured for its repeated verses is the last 
book of the Odyssey. This book, however, with 
its 548 verses, has only 180 repeated verses, or 
just a trifle under the average for all of Homer. 
The total number of verses in Homer is 27,853. 
Of these 9253 are repeated verses, that is, thirty- 
three per cent of the entire number are repeated, 
which is, as already said, just a shade higher than 

j the percentage in the last book of the Odyssey. 

\ Whatever may be our feeling in regard to re- 

ipeated verses, the Iliad and the Odyssey clearly 






Reflect the same poetic attitude in this matter. 



/ 



THE ILIAD AND THE ODYSSEY 265 ^-|^^^ 

Lastly, and most important, these two poems | \j/^\ 
are of almost the same length. Each was divided ({ 
by scholars into twenty-four books, the books 
of the Odyssey averaging a trifle over five hun- 
dred verses each, while those of the Iliad are a 
little under six hundred and sixty. No poem of 
classical Greece can be compared as to length 
with either the Iliad or the Odyssey. No poem 
antedating cojnparatively late times has been 
preserved, except the Homeric poems, which con- 
tains as many as two thousand verses. The 
longest extant lyric poem is an epic theme treated 
in lyric style by Pindar and it has but two hun- 
dred and ninety-nine verses. The longest single 
drama of which we have any knowledge is the 
Oedipus at Colonus, with seventeen hundred and 
eighty verses. 

' We cannot do more than make a rough guess 
of the size of the different poems of the epic cycle. 
The Thebais is said to have contained about six 
thousand'^ verses, and the Epigoni was of about 
the same length, that is, each was hardly one-half 
the size of the Odyssey. The Cypria had eleven 
books, the Aethiopis five, the Destruction of Troy 
two, the Little Iliad four, and the Nosti five. Thus 
the poem which told of the return of the various 
Achaeans had less than a fourth as many books 
as the poem which told of the return of the single 
hero, Odysseus, while the Telegoneia had but two 
books. We are not permitted to be dogmatic 

B Miiller, History of AtKfient Greek lAteratwre, 71, sajB 5600 
verses. 



266 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

about the size of each of these books, but we can 
hardly be mistaken when we believe that no one 
of these poems could have approached the length 
of either of the Homeric poems. 

It seems clear also that the mass or bulk of 
these poems grew less the later they originated. 
The Telegoneia, written about 600 b.c, had but 
two books, but even two books made a long poem 
for that time, since the seventh and the sixth 
centuries were the centuries of short songs. The 
great names in literature during that period are 
Archilochus, Alcman, Ibycus, Sappho, Alcaeus, 
Solon, Tyrtaeus, and Stesichorus. At the turn 
into the fifth century the great names are Pindar, 
Anacreon, Simonides, and Bacchylides. No one 
of these seems to have produced songs or poems 
of more than modest compass. 

If any one will run over the list of famous 
poets who came just before, during, and immedi- 
ately after the time of Peisistratus, he must 
notice that this was the era of short songs. This 
was also the age of the Seven Wise Men who 
gained fame by the brevity of their speech. Yet 
this era of the short song and the pithy speech is 
the very time in which Wolf and his followers, 
down to the last article just written by Bethe, 
assujue that a commission gathered scattered 
songs into one or two gigantic poems. 

It is not merely an accident that Sappho and 
Alcaeus wrote lyric poetry at the same time, and 
that Pindar, Simonides, Anacreon, Ibycus, and 



THE ILIAD AND THE ODYSSEY 267 

Bacchylides were almost contemporaries. Nor is 
it an accident that Aeschylus, Sophocles, and 
Euripides in the next century were all dramatists. 
All of these were the children of their own age, 
and nothing could be more improbable than that 
an age which inspired and produced short songs 
should have created by commission or otherwise 
two poems of such bulk as the Iliad and the 
Odyssey. The tendency was all the other way. 
Stesichorus even broke up the masses of the epic 
into lyric songs, and Terpander a little earlier set 
small portions of Homer to the music of the lyre. 
We may be sure that it was not a lyric age nor 
a dramatic age but an age wholly given over to 
the epic that called forth these two lengthy poems. 
Matthew Arnold named Homer the poet of the 
grand style, but he is also the poet of the grand 
outlines, the massive scale. Everything is pre- 
sented on such a huge canvas. Not a Trojan acts 
until verse 1419 of the Hiad, and even though it is 
a war poem no less than 2400 verses precede the 
first shedding of blood. The Odyssey is the story 
of Odysseus, but that hero does not appear until 
well along in the fifth book. Everything is so 
deliberate and sketched in such large outlines. It 
is this massive scale on which both poems are con-^ 
structed that makes impossible the theory that 
they could have been built out of smaller songs. 
One might make a huge pile of sand by putting 
together many little piles of sand, but one caimot 
give the appearance of an oak to any mass of 



268 THE UNITY OP HOMER 

twigs, however nnmerous. The size of an org^an- 
ism is as evident in the parts as in the whole, and 
the vast scale on which the Iliad and the Odyssey 
are constructed is as manifest in the single books 
as in the entire poem. An annalistic poem might 
have one hundred thousand verses, yet be con- 
structed on a small scale, the bulk simply depend- 
ing on the many small events, as a dictionary 
expands by the simple addition of new names. 
This great bulk of the Homeric poems is not 
due to diffusiveness or idle words, and Matthew 
Arnold picks out as one of the essential marks of 
Homeric poetry its rapidity and directness. 

This massive structure is unlike anything else 
produced by the Greeks and is absolutely foreign 
to the poetic impulses of the sixth century, that 
is, to the age of Peisistratus. 

This massiveness is not in the length of the 
poems so much as in the broad framework on 
which the parts are built. Vergil wrote a poem 
which sang both of a man and of arms, that is, 
he took both the Iliad and the Odyssey for his 
theme and he had Homer before him, yet the 
Aeneid is six thousand verses shorter than the 
single poem, the Iliad. Nothing in Homer so fills 
me with wonder as this huge reach and grasp. 
It is not so much the size of the poems as the 
massiveness of the details which reveals the 
power and the greatness of the poet, and in this 
the Iliad and the Odyssey stand alone, but exactly 
alike. It is possible to believe that Greece had one 



THE ILIAD AND THE ODYSSEY 269 

man who could project such mighty, such enor- 
mouSy works of art, but it is unthinkable that she 
had at any period two men or a group of men 
with any such capacity. ^ 

Everything fits into the theory of a single 
Homer: the civilization, the language, the gods, 
the outlines, the marks of genius; and all these 
are supported by the unanimous verdict of the 
best poets and the greatest critics of twenty-five 
hundred years. 

The evidence for the unity of the Iliad and 
the Odyssey is so strong that we should be com- 
pelled to postulate a single Homer even if ancient 
Greece had believed in many. But antiquity was 
united in the belief of one divine Homer, and 
only one. 



INDEX 



Abstract nounB, nse of, in 
Iliad and OdjBBej, 85- 
88. 

AchilleiSy the Ur-Ilias theory 
regarding, 83-105. 

Actors, The, in Homer, intro- 
duction of, 166-171, 223; 
individualization of, 172; 
traditions concerning, 196, 
224, 225, 229, 234, 235, 
237-239; names of, 225- 
226; epithets applied to, 
231-232. 

Aelian, 14, 25, 38. 

Aeneid, 1. See aUo Vergil. 

Aeolic forms, in Iliad and 
Odyssey, 4, 96. 

Aeschines, 29. 

Aeschylus, 27, 197, 198, 199, 
242, 248, 267. 

Aethiopis, 11, 265. 

Ajaz and the Athenians, bear- 
ing of relations of, on 
the Homeric Question, 47- 
51. 

AlcaeuB, 266. 

Alcman, 244, 266. 

Alexandria, 7, 155. 

Allen, 32, 33, 36, 72. 

Amphictyonic Council, 62. 

Anacreon, 266. 

Anonymity of authorship of 
Hiad and Odyssey, 246. 

Antigonus of Carystus, 

Paradoxes, evidence for 
Homeric authorship of 
Thebais, 21. 

Antimachns, 16, 59. 

Antiphon, 24. 

ApoUonius of Bhodes, 180, 
252. 

Archaeology, testimony of, 
135. See also Mycenae; 
Troy; etc. 

Arehilochus, 266. 



[871] 



Argos, and the Argives, 18- 
20; inscription to Homer, 
19. 

Aristarchus, 24, 40, 41, 50, 151. 

Aristophanes, 15, 28. 

AristoUe, 14-15, 34, 37, 38, 49, 
56, 64, 77, 251. 

Armor, 117-118. 

Arnold, Matthew, 74, 202, 267, 
268. 

Astronomy, testimony of, 107- 
109. 

Athenaeus, 14, 28, 71. 

Athens (Attica), CKty Dion- 
ysia in, 45; influence on 
Homeric poetry, 47-55, 
55-72 ; direct references 
to, in Odyssey, 51-52; 
geography of, not familiar 
to Homer, 53. See also 
Peisistratus. 

Authorship, Greek pride in, 
243. 

Bacchylides, 266, 267. 

Bards (rhapsodes, reciters), 
Homeric, 7, 61, 64, 219; 
regulations concerning, 
6^66; Homer's use of, 
in Iliad and Odyssey, 128- 
134; manner of Homeric 
recitation, 156-160. 

Bassett, 101, 118, 250. 

Bekker, cited, 96. 

Bentley, cited, 66, 69, 71. 

Bergk, cited on contradictions 
in Homer, 145-147. 

Bethe, cited, 79, 80, 81, 121, 
123, 147, 220. 

Boiling, cited, 86, 87. 

Bunyan, 173. 

Byron, 173. 

Callimachus, 33. 

Callinus, 15, 16, 248, 249. 

Case-endings, use of, in Iliad 
and Odyssey, 92-93. 

Catalogue of the Ships, 47, 48. 

Cauer, cited, 86. 



272 



THE UNITY OF HOMER 



GenrantM, 143, 172. 

Character delineation in Ho- 
mer, 173, 179, 180, 181, 
201-204, 253, 254; Helen, 
182-189; OdyaseuB, 189- 
195; unity of, 195, 201- 
203; Hector, 205-240; 
Paris, 227-230. 

Chaucer, 250. 

Chios, island of, 3, 7, 8, 63. 

Chorizontic moyement (chori- 
zontes), 41, 95. 

Christ, Ur-Iliaa theory, 82. 

Christ-Schmid, 123. 

Cicero, 78, 102. 

Cleisthenes of Sicjon, 61. 

Climate, arguments from, 106- 
107, 109-110. 

Contradictions and inconsis- 
tencies in Homer, 137- 
171; three groups, 140, 
145, 151, 162. 

Crete, 63, 117. 

Croiset, cited, 86, 88. 

Cynaethus, 7. 

Cypria, The, 11, 25, 230, 236, 
265. See dlao Epic Cycle. 

Qyprus, 63. 

Dante, 1, 173. 

Dative plural, forms of, used 
in Iliad and Odyssey, 92- 
93. 

David, king of Israel, 4, 200. 

De Quincey, 74. 

Definite article, use of, in 
Iliad and Odyssey, 88-92. 

Demodoeus, the bard, Homer's 
use of, 132. 

Demosthenes, 2. 

Destruction of Troy, 11, 266. 
See €d90 Epic Qyde. 

"Devices of temporary ex- 
pediency," 151. 

Digamma, used by Homer, 69- 
72. 

Dio Cassius, cited, 16. 

Diogenes Laertius, 47. 

Dorpfeld, 152. 

Drama, festival of, in ancient 
Greece, 45; period of, in 
Greek history, 242. 

Drenip, 123, 152, 156. 

Diimmler, cited, 220. 

Early Ionic language, 4, 85- 
98. 



EleeirOy 199. 

Elderkin, 254 note. 

Epic Cycle, 243, 251, 254; 
arguments for Homer 's 
authorship of, 13-31; ar- 
guments against, 31-38, 
69. See also Cypria; 
Thehaia; etc 

Epigoni, 265. 

Euripides, 2, 48, 55, 197, 198, 
199, 200, 267. 

Eustathius, 71. 

Fick, cited, 76, 79, 149. 

Finsler, cited, 15, 18, 109, 133. 

Fish, Homer's aversion to, 
6-7. 

Flickinger, cited, 46 note, 63 
note^ 242 note. 

Fox, Professor, cited, 107-108. 

Friedlander, cited on the 
simile of the wasps, 15&- 
151. 

Fritse, von, cited, 122. 

Geography, 52-53, 113. 

Gladstone, 174. 

Glaucon, Homeric reciter, 64. 

Gods and heroes in Homer, 
individualization of, 172; 
ignoble conception of 
gods, 176; use of, 262- 
263. 

Goethe, 7»-74, 78, 152, 201. 

Gorgias, 24. 

Greek tradition, inconsistency 
of, 197. 

Greeks, conservatism of, 61— 
62. 

Grote, cited, 18. 

Grundy, Mr., cited, 110. 

Harper's CUusioal Dictionary, 
cited, 78. 

Hecataeus, 244. 

Hector, 205-240. 

Helen, Homer's portrayal of, 
18^189. 

Hellanicus, 41. 

Herodotus, 205, 244; evidence 
from as to date of Homer, 
8, 11; as to Homer's au- 
thorship of the Theba\», 
17-18, 21, of the Cypria, 
23, 24, 25; as to author- 
ship of the Iliad and 
Odyssey, 57, 68; on char- 
acter of Paris, 229. 



INDEX 



273 



Hedod, 10, 21, 29, 92, 203, 
220-222, 243, 252; Con- 
test between Homer and 
Hesiod, 19, 22. 

Hiatus, in the Uiad and Odys- 
sey, 94-95. 

Hiero, tyrant of Syracuse, 61. 

Higher criticism (higher cri- 
tics), 95, 98, 101-106, 139, 
161, 211. 

Homer, estimate of, by an- 
cient world, 2; traditions 
regarding, 3; nativity of, 
3-8; also called Melesi- 
genes, 7 ; sources of manu- 
scripts of, 63 ; text of, un- 
altered, 6&-69; references 
to, in early Greek litera- 
ture, 249; his pride in 
authorship, 247. 
date of, 3--4; evidence of 
Herodotus, 8; internal 
evidence of his poetry, 9; 
inferences from archeo- 
logical discoveries, 10; 
references of other writ- 
ers, 10-11. 

Homeric Hymns, 92, 97. 

Homeric Question, The, 41, 42, 
43; arguments of Wolf, 
43-72, of his followers, 
76. 

Homeridae, 8. 

Horace, 2, 33, 78, 252. 

Howes, cited, 2 note. 

Huxley, cited, 79. 

Hymn to Apollo, 37. 

Ibycus, 266. 

Hiad, 1, 10; first written ref- 
erence to, 10-11; mention 
of Argos and Argives in, 
1&-20; meter and lan- 
guage, theoiy of, 240- 
242; anonymity, 246. 
Besemblances between, and 
the Odyssey, 250-268; 
choice of theme, 260; 
early indication of theme, 
251-252; plot, 253; dra- 
matic quiUity, 253-254; 
effects produced, 254-257 ; 
treatment of crisis, 257- 
258; prolonging of sus^ 
pense, 258-259; forecast- 
ing of events, 251^260; 



climax, 261-262; use of 
gods, 262-263; balance, 
262-264; repeated verses, 
264; length, 265-267; 
massiveness, 267-269; 
rapidity and directness 
of style, 268. 

Hium. See Troy. 

Introduction of actors, 166- 
171. 

Interpolations in Homer, dis- 
cussion of arguments on, 
46-72; internal evidence, 
47-56; external evidence, 
56-72; considered as ex- 
planation of contradic- 
tions, 139-140. 

Ion, Homeric reciter, 64. 

Isocrates, 22, 38, 66. 

Jastrow, Morris, cited, 244. 

Jebb, Ur-Ilias theory, 82, 94, 
95. 

Keller, cited, 74 note. 

Kenyon, cited, 2 note 1, 33. 

Kinkel, cited, 17, 32. 

Kinkel and Allen, cited, 32, 
33 

Kirchh'off, 152; cited, 131. 

Koch, cited, 89. 

Lachmann, 162 ; cited, 79, 166. 

Lang, Andrew, 12, 74, 83. 

Language, arguments from, 
71, 88, 11»-134; depen- 
dence of epic poet on, 
154; sources of, 240-242. 
See also Vocabulary. 

Leaf, Walter, Ur-Iliae theory, 
82; cited, on topography 
of Troy, 112-114, 115; 
on the Trojan Catalogue, 
113-114, on image of 
Athena, 121 ; simile of the 
wasps, 161; on Trojan 
war, 163, 231. 

LiUle Iliad, 11, 252, 265. See 
also Epic Cycle. 

Longinus, 40, 41. 

Lucian, 40, 41. 

Ludwich, 152; dted, 33 note; 
72. 

Lycon, 63. 

Lycurgus, 7, 66. 

Macanlay, 37, 81; cited on 
Vergil, 180 note 2. 



274 



THE UNITY OP HOMBE 



Mahaffy, cited, 141, 144, 147, 

218. 
Margites, The, 37. 
Marseilles, 7, 63. 
Megara (Megarian soiurees), 

47, 49, 50, 55, 58. 
Melas Biver, 7. 
Melesigenes, 7. See aUto 

Homer. 
Menrad, cited, 103. 
Meter, in Iliad and Odyssey, 

93, 240-242. 
Metrodorus of LAmpsacus, 64. 
Meyer, Wilhelm, cited, 98. 
MUton, 1, 134, 180, 238, 241, 

247, 253. 
MimnermuB, 249. 
Misquotations, 13-15, 30, 37. 
Monro, cited, 89, 93. 
Moore, 37. 

Muelder, cited, 76, 79, 81. 
Murray, Gilbert, cited, 11, 12, 

64, 103, 246. 
MusaeuB, 57, 58. 
Mycenae, topography and civi- 
lization, 115, 124 if. 
Mythology, Homeric, 177. 
Nativity of Homer, 3-8. 
Negative, The, adjectival use 

of, in Iliad and Odyssey, 

95. 
Kostoi, 11, 265. See aUo Epic 

Cycle. 
Odyssean words used in the 

Iliad, 83-85. 
Odysseus, Homer's portrayal 

of, 189-195. 
Odyssey, 1, 10; first written 

reference to, 11; mention 

of Argos (Ar gives), 18- 

20; resemblances between, 

and Iliad, 250-269 (see 

also Iliad). 
Oedipus at Colonus, 265. 
Oldfather, 124. 
Onomacritus, 56, 57, 58. 
OriginaMliad theory. See 

Ur-Ilias. 
Orsi, Signer, excavations of, 

123-124. 
Panathenaic Festival, 66. 
Panyasis of Samos, or of Hali- 

camassus, 59. 
Papyrus fi'agments, 2, 33. 
Paradise Last, 1. See also 

Milton. 



Paris, place of, in traditioii 
and in Homer, 226-227, 
234, 237; character, 227- 
230, 232. 

Patronymics, use of, in Iliad 
and Odyssey, 97-100. 

Pausanias, 15, 16, 17, 21. 

Peisander of Rhodes, 59. 

Peisistratus, 44, 46; disens- 
sion of influence of, on 
Homeric poetry, 55-66, 
68; commission theory of 
Homeric composition, 44, 
46, 53, 62-66, 166, 266, 
267. 

Perfect, formation of, in 
Homer, 93-94. 

Pericles, 62. 

Pheidias, 244. 

Phemius, the bard. Homer 'a 
use of, 132. 

Pherecydes, 242. 

Philoctetes, 197. 

Phillips, Stephen, Ulysses, 213. 

Pindar, 25, 28, 220-223, 248, 
249, 266. 

Plato, 2, 14, 21, 37, 38, 64, 68, 
77, 78. 

Plutarch, 14, 68. 

Pope, cited, 172, 178, 179. 

Proclus, 33. 

Protagoras, 23. 

Pyhiemenes, contradiction con- 
cerning, 141, 142, 143. 

Quintilian, 2, 78. 

Quintus of Smyrna, 180, 252. 

Bamsay, Sir William, cited, 6. 

Bawlinson, cited on Argos and 
Argives, 18-19. 

Religion. See Theology. 

Repeated verses, 264. 

Retardation, 257-259. 

Rhapsodes (Reciters). See 
Bards, Homeric. 

Robert, cited, 79, 80, 114, 118. 

Roemer, cited, 104. 

Rothe, Carl, cited, 106, 152, 
153, 201. 

Rutherford, cited, 27. 

Sappho, 266. 

Schedius, supposed contradic- 
tion concerning, 142. 

Schiller, 74, 78, 152. 

Schliemann, Heinrich, 111- 
112, 115, 116, 162. 

Seeck, cited, 52. 



INDEX 



275 



Seneea, 40, 41, 78. 

Seven Wise Men, 266. 

Sejmoar, cited, 78, 119. 

Shakespeare, 134, 166, 172, 
202. 

SheUey, 74, 203. 

Shewan, cited, 92, 93, 101. 

Shorej, Paul, cited, 79 note, 
101. 

SicelB, The, 123-124. 

SicUy, 7, 123. 

Sicyon, 61. 

Sidon, and the Sidonians, 12. 

Similes, in Homer, 124-127. 

Simonides, 29, 249, 266. 

Sinope, 7, 63. 

Smyrna, birthplace of Homer, 
3-8. 

Smyth, cited, 69 note. 

Snider, J. Denton, cited, 174. 

Socrates, 24, 64, 212. 

Solon, 266. 

Sophisto, The, 23, 24. 

Sophocles, 2, 197, 198, 199, 
242, 267. 

Spiess, Heinrich, acknowledg- 
ment, 204 note. 

Stasinus, 23. 

Stawell, Miss F. Melian, cited, 
90, 95, 101. 

StesichoruB, 29, 266, 267. 

StesimbrotuB of Thasos, 64. 

Strabo, 16, 68, 122, 249. 

Stiirmer, 152. 

Stnmmer, cited, 90, 91. 

Suidas, 37, 38. 

Telegoneia, 265, 266. 

Terpander, 10, 267. 

Thackeray, 143. 

Thehaie, 11, 252, 265; arga- 
mento to prove Homer's 
authorship of, 15-22. Bee 
aieo Epic Oyt^e. 

Theban Qyde. See Epic Qyde. 

Thebes, 19, 20, 220. 

Theognis, 244. 

Theology of Homer, 134, 177, 
178-179. 

Thomson, theory of expurga- 
tion, 103. 

Thucydides, 37, 65, 205, 242, 
244, 245. 

Timaeus of Sicily, 68. 

Tiryns, 135. 



Tradition, influence of, on 
Homer, 196, 224, 225, 
229-234, 235, 237-239. 

Trevelyan, cited, 81 note, 180 
note 2. 

Trojan Ojel^. See Epic Qyde. 

Troy, topography and loca- 
tion of, 111-113, 135, 221, 
222; culture, 116. 

^^rrtaeus of Lacedaemonia, 61, 
266. 

Ur-IUas, The, 82-105. 

Van Leeuwen, cited, 86, 104. 

VergU, 1, 5, 78, 180, 253, 268. 

Verrall, cited, 11. 

Vocabulary, argumente from, 
as to connection of Iliad 
and Odyssey, 83-105; ab- 
stract nouns, 85-88; defi- 
nite article, 88-92; case- 
endings, 92-93 ; meter, 
93 ; formation of the per- 
fect, 93-94; Aeolic forms, 
96-97; patronymics, 97- 
100; hiatus, 94-95; ad- 
jectival use of negative, 
95. See also Digamma. 

Voss, cited, 74, 75. 

Wace, cited, 135-136. 

Warrior Vase, 118. 

Wasps, simile of the, 150-151. 

Welcker, 133. 

Wieland, 74. 

Wilamowitz, 152, 269; cited, 
11, 12, 15, 18, 22, 23, 43, 
76, 79, 80, 81, 82, 109, 
114, 148, 219. 

Witte, cited, 96. 

Wolf, P. A., Prolegomena, 41; 
argumente of, 43-72, 78, 
266; challenged by Voss, 
75. 

Wood, 152; cited, 4, 144^145, 
174. 

"Wrath," The, 164, 189, 237. 

Wright, dted, 79. 

Xenodotus, 50. 

Xenon, 25, 40, 41. 

Xenophanes from Colophon, 
references to Homer, 10- 
11, 60, 249. 

Xenophon, 31, 37, 38, 245. 

Zephyrus, in Homer, 4r-5. 



'■J> 



H»- 



THE BORROWER WILL BE CHARGED 
AN OVERDUE FEE IF THIS BOOK 18 
NOT RETURNED TO THE LIBRARY 
ON OR BEFORE THE LAST DATE 
STAMPED BELOW. NON-RECEIPT OF 
OVERDUE NOTICES DOES NOT 
EXEMPT THE BORROWER FROM 
OVERDUE FEES. 





i 



f 




